WHAT CHRISTMAS IS AS WE GROW OLDER.

THE EXTRA CHRISTMAS NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLD WORDS.
CONDUCTED BY CHARLES DICKENS.

CHRISTMAS, 1851.
Price 2d.


WHAT CHRISTMAS IS, AS WE GROW OLDER.

TIME was, with most of us, when Christmas
Day encircling all our limited world like a
magic ring, left nothing out for us to miss
or seek; bound together all our home enjoyments,
affections, and hopes; grouped every
thing and every one around the Christmas
fire; and made the little picture shining in
our bright young eyes, complete.

Time came, perhaps, all so soon! when our
thoughts overleaped that narrow boundary
when there was some one (very dear, we
thought then, very beautiful, and absolutely
perfect) wanting to the fulness of our happiness;
when we were wanting too (or we
thought so, which did just as well) at the
Christmas hearth by which that some one sat;
and when we intertwined with every wreath
and garland of our life that some one's name.

That was the time for the bright visionary
Christmases which have long arisen from us
to shew faintly, after summer rain, in the
palest edges of the rainbow! That was the
time for the beatified enjoyment of the things
that were to be, and never were, and yet the
things that were so real in our resolute hope
that it would be hard to say, now, what
realities achieved since, have been stronger!

What! Did that Christmas never really come
when we and the priceless pearl who was our
young choice were received, after the happiest
of totally impossible marriages, by the two
united families previously at daggers-drawn on
our account? When brothers and sisters in law
who had always been rather cool to us before
our relationship was effected, perfectly doted on
us. and when fathers and mothers overwhelmed
us with unlimited incomes? Was that Christmas
dinner never really eaten, after which we
arose, and generously and eloquently rendered
honor to our late rival, present in the company,
then and there exchanging friendship and
forgiveness, and founding an attachment, not
surpassed in Greek or Roman story,
which subsisted until death? Has that same
rival long ceased to care for that same priceless
pearl, and married for money, and become
usurious? Above all, do we really know, now,
that we should probably have been miserable
if we had won and worn the pearl, and that
we are better without her?

That Christmas when we had recently
achieved so much fame; when we had been
carried in triumph somewhere, for doing
something great and good; when we had won
an honored and ennobled name, and arrived
and were received at home in a shower of
tears of joy; is it possible that that Christmas
has not come yet?

And is our life here, at the best, so constituted
that, pausing as we advance at such
a noticeable mile-stone in the track as this
great birthday, we look back on the things
that never were, as naturally and full as
gravely as on the things that have been and
are gone, or have been and still are? If it be
so, and so it seems to be, must we come to
the conclusion, that life is little better than a
dream, and little worth the loves and strivings
that we crowd into it?

No! Far be such miscalled philosophy from
us, dear Reader, on Christmas Day! Nearer
and closer to our hearts be the Christmas
spirit, which is the spirit of active usefulness,
perseverance, cheerful discharge of duty,
kindness, and forbearance! It is in the last
virtues especially, that we are, or should be,
strengthened by the unaccomplished visions
of our youth; for, who shall say that they are
not our teachers to deal gently even with the
impalpable nothings of the earth!

Therefore, as we grow older, let us be more
thankful that the circle of our Christmas
associations and of the lessons that they
bring, expands! Let us welcome every one
of them, and summon them to take their places
by the Christmas hearth.

Welcome, old aspirations, glittering creatures
of an ardent fancy, to your shelter
underneath the holly! We know you, and
have not outlived you yet. Welcome, old
projects and old loves, however fleeting, to your
nooks among the steadier lights that burn
around us. Welcome, all that was ever real
to our hearts; and for the earnestness that
made you real, thanks to Heaven! Do we
build no Christmas castles in the clouds now?
Let our thoughts, fluttering like butterflies
among these flowers of children, bear witness!
Before this boy, there stretches out a Future,
brighter than we ever looked on in our old
romantic time, but bright with honor and
with truth. Around this little head on
which the sunny curls lie heaped, the graces
sport, as prettily, as airily, as when there
was no scythe within the reach of Time to
shear away the curls of our first-love. Upon
another girl's face near it--placider but
smiling bright--a quiet and contented little
face, we see Home fairly written. Shining
from the word, as rays shine from a star,
we see how, when our graves are old, other
hopes than ours are young, other hearts
than ours are moved; how other ways are
smoothed; how other happiness blooms,
ripens, and decays--no, not decays, for
other homes and other bands of children,
not yet in being nor for ages yet to be, arise,
and bloom and ripen to the end of all!

Welcome, everything! Welcome, alike what
has been, and what never was, and what we
hope may be, to your shelter underneath the
holly, to your places 'round the Christmas
fire, where what is sits open-hearted! In
yonder shadow, do we see obtruding furtively
upon the blaze, an enemy's face? By Christ-
mas Day we do forgive him! If the injury he
has done us may admit of such companion-
ship, let him come here and take his place. If
otherwise, unhappily, let him go hence, assured
that we will never injure nor accuse him.

On this day, we shut out Nothing!

"Pause," says a low voice. "Nothing? Think!"

"On Christmas Day, we will shut out from
our fireside, Nothing."

"Not the shadow of a vast City where the
withered leaves are lying deep?" the voice re-
plies. " Not the shadow that darkens the whole
globe? Not the shadow of the City of the Dead?"

Not even that. Of all days in the year, we
will turn our faces towards that City upon
Christmas Day, and from its silent hosts bring
those we loved, among us. City of the Dead,
in the blessed name wherein we are gathered
together at this time, and in the Presence that
is here among us according to the promise,
we will receive, and not dismiss, thy people
who are dear to us!

Yes. We can look upon these children
angels that alight, so solemnly, so beautifully,
among the living children by the fire, and can
bear to think how they departed from us.
Entertaining angels unawares, as the Patri-
archs did, the playful children are unconscious
of their guests; but we can see them--can
see a radiant arm around one favorite neck,
as if there were a tempting of that child
away. Among the celestial figures there is

one, a poor mis-shapen boy on earth, of
a glorious beauty now, of whom his dying
mother said it grieved her much to leave him
here, alone, for so many years as it was likely
would elapse before he came to her--being
such a little child. But he went quickly, and
was laid upon her breast, and in her hand she
leads him.

There was a gallant boy, who fell, far
away, upon a burning sand beneath a burning
sun, and said, " Tell them at home, with my
last love, how much I could have wished to
kiss them once, but that I died contented and
had done my duty! " Or there was another,
over whom they read the words, " Therefore
we commit his body to the dark! " and so con-
signed him to the lonely ocean and sailed on.
Or there was another who lay down to his
rest in the dark shadow of great forests, and,
on earth, awoke no more. O shall they not,
from sand and sea and forest, be brought
home at such a time!

There was a dear girl--almost a woman--
never to be one--who made a mourning
Christmas in a house of joy, and went her
trackless way to the silent City. Do we re-
collect her, worn out, faintly whispering what
could not be heard, and falling into that last
sleep for weariness? O look upon her now!
O look upon her beauty, her serenity, her
changeless youth, her happiness! The daughter
of Jairus was recalled to life, to die; but she,
more blest, has heard the same voice, saying
unto her, "Arise for ever!"

We had a friend who was our friend from
early days, with whom we often pictured the
changes that were to come upon our lives,
and merrily imagined how we would speak,
and walk, and think, and talk, when we came
to be old. His destined habitation in the City
of the Dead received him in his prime. Shall
he be shut out from our Christmas remembrance?
Would his love have so excluded us?
Lost friend, lost child, lost parent, sister,
brother, husband, wife, we will not so discard
you! You shall hold your cherished places in
our Christmas hearts, and by our Christmas
fires; and in the season of immortal hope,
and on the birthday of immortal mercy, we
will shut out Nothing!

The winter sun goes down over town and
village; on the sea it makes a rosy path,
as if the Sacred tread were fresh upon the
water. A few more moments, and it sinks,
and night comes on, and lights begin to
sparkle in the prospect. On the hill-side be-
yond the shapelessly-diffused town, and in
the quiet keeping of the trees that gird the
village-steeple, remembrances are cut in stone,
planted in common flowers, growing in grass,
entwined with lowly brambles around many
a mound of earth. In town and village, there
are doors and windows closed against the
weather, there are flaming logs heaped high,
there are joyful faces, there is healthy music
of voices. Be all ungentleness and harm ex-
cluded from the temples of the Household
Gods, but be those remembrances admitted
with tender encouragement! They are of
the time and all its comforting and peaceful
reassurances; and of the history that re-
united even upon earth the living and the
dead; and of the broad beneficence and good-
ness that too many men have tried to tear to
narrow shreds.

WHAT CHRISTMAS IS TO A BUNCH
OF PEOPLE.

THE FATHER OF A FAMILY rubs his hands
with a genial smile when Christmas comes;
and yet he now and then raises one finger to
the calculating " organ " of his cranium with
rather a thoughtful air, suggestive of certain
bills and taxes, which he is resolved shall not
weigh upon his mind. Why should they?
He will get through his Christmas bills some-
how or other, as he has done before. He has
no doubt of being able to muster the money
to " article " his eldest son to a highly respect-
able solicitor; he has already laid up a small
portion for his eldest daughter, and makes
pretty sure of doing as much for the others by
the time they are old enough to be married.
He has a good business; his wife is a clever
manager; they live happily together; the
holly-berries smile at him with the well-
remembered sparkle of early days; he there-
fore determines to enjoy the merry season as
of old. What if he does see half-a-dozen more
grey hairs displaying themselves, as though to
remind him that another year has passed, and
a certain line or two in his face does look a
trifle deeper than when he had last observed
it? What have such small matters to do
with the real age of a man? A man is as
old as he feels, and no more. The fact is,
the Father of a Family is as young as he was
twenty years ago; so he gives his hair an
additional and rather flourishing touch with a
comb, puts on a new waistcoat, brushes the
collar of his coat, and, looking down with
complacency on his boots as he sets his hat
lightly upon his head, sallies out upon the land-
ing-place, and shouts a jaunty inquiry as to
when his wife and daughter will be ready to
go to church. The boys are gone on before.
Meanwhile he stands thrumming a pleased,
but impatient, tattoo with his fingers upon the
banisters, and inhaling every now and then a
savoury whiff of sweet herbs rising up from
the kitchen.

THE MOTHER OF A FAMILY has a world of
anxious thoughts about her. She likes Christ-
mas; it is, no doubt, a pleasant time; there
are many sweet memories and hopes attend-
ing it, and altogether it must be considered as
happy: but the butcher's bill, she knows, must
be heavy--the baker's too--and as for the
grocer's, she is almost afraid to think of it.
Besides this, there is a new dress-maker's bill,
which she has not yet told Mr. Broadback
about. But how was all this to be avoided?
As to herself, she could not do with less, nor
her eldest daughter, especially on the eve
of her marriage--a happy marriage she most
devoutly hopes it will be. Then there are the
growing girls, all of whose dresses have got
so shockingly short, that she could almost
wish the follies of Bloomerism had been
softened and translated, and entered England
under another character--as a Persian,
Turkish, or Polish ladies' " fashions," just
imported from Paris--so that something
economically elegant might have gradually
been introduced, inch by inch, as it were, to
the great saving of the Mothers of large families
of daughters. As for the bonnet-maker, she
must wait. It is unknown what sums have been
paid that bonnet-maker in the course of the
last six years. Perhaps it would be best not to
think any more of these matters just at present.
At any rate, Mr. Broadback shall have a good
Christmas dinner; she will take care of that;
and all their relations and friends who are
invited shall be made as happy as possible.

THE ELDEST SON has a mixed feeling
about Christmas. He has no very romantic
impressions of the study of the Law; but he
wishes to begin life, and to take the first step
towards making his way in the world; and as
he is to be articled to Mr. Benjamin Sheep-
skin early in January, he looks upon the
intermediate time rather impatiently. At
least he would do so, but that his cousin Ellen
is to dine with them on Christmas-day, and
stay on a visit for a week afterwards, during
which there will be round games and forfeits,
and he will "go partners" with his cousin,
and dance with her, and show her all his law-
books, and decoy her under the mistletoe-
bough; and so he expects to pass a very
merry time before he goes to the office of Mr.
Sheepskin.

What Christmas is to THE ELDEST DAUGHTER,
we may pretty well infer from the increased
brightness in her eyes, the frequent blush that
suffuses her soft cheeks, the occasional pensive
air suddenly awakening up with a smile, the
tender sigh, and the additional pains she takes
with her beautiful hair, which is never out of
order, and yet she thinks it continually needs
to be brushed and smoothed, and set to rights.
To her, Christmas evidently comes with a wed-
ding-ring concealed in a wreath of evergreen.

Besides the eldest son, there are "THE BOYS;"
and these rollicking young chaps are home
for the holidays; and Christmas to them is
(weather permitting) an endless succession of
sliding and snow-balls, and hoops, and going
on the ice; and plum-puddings, and mince-pies,
and games at blind-man's-buff, and other romps
in the evening, with snap-dragon after supper.

To THE YOUNGEST CHILD a little bright-eyed
fairy of five years old, in a white and sky-
blue frock, purple sash, and red shoes
Christmas is a season of romance. It is a
whirl of shining hours, in which there are
new toys of mysterious beauty, and dances,
and kisses, and cakes of all sorts, and sweetmeats,
and wonderful things made of painted
sugar, and all the creatures of the earth, with
Noah's Ark in the middle, and brothers and
sisters, and playmates, the eldest of whom is
not yet " gone eight"--spoken of, like a little
clock!--and Mamma in a new dress, shining
with bracelets, and a chain and things; and
dear Auntie with a busy face making something
nice to eat; and loud shouting and
crowding round a Christmas tree, all of green
and gold, with lights; and glittering presents
of priceless value dangling from every twig,
and hidden in deep green recesses of the
boughs. This is the true Fairy-land we have
all read so much about!

But THE MAIDEN AUNT, she who so con-
tinually sits on one side, out of the way, or in
the quiet shade of a corner she who is so
continually forgotten, except when some kind
assistance is needed shall we, too, forget her?
Far from it. We well know what Christmas
is to her. All her life is devoted to amiable
disinterested acts of practical aid to all in the
house who need it; and the period of Christmas,
to her, is the summing up of a year's
account of sympathies and kindly offices, of
which she herself takes no note beyond the
moment, and which have no place in her
memory except to cause a sigh of regret
when any gentle service has not effected all
the good she intended.

What Christmas is to THE OLD HOUSE-KEEPER
of a substantial family, more wealthy
than the one just described, we must all see
at once to be a very serious business indeed;--
complicated, and full of grave cares, packages
of hope, close-covered preparations, and spicy
responsibilities. There she stands, with her
tortoise-shell spectacles, and a great bunch of
keys dangling over her white apron! No
minister of State thinks more of herself
(Heaven forgive us!--himself) than this old
lady does. Her "linen closet" is a model of
neatness and order; her " china closet " is set
out with the utmost precision, and not without
an eye to effect in the prominent display on
the highest shelves of the choice old china-
bowls, basins, tea-cups, saucers, and an im-
mensely ancient tea-pot of the ugliest shape
imaginable, and covered with very ugly faded
paintings, of great value. But most of all is
her pride and importance in the house, and in
her own self-esteem, displayed when she un-
locks and opens the door of her " store-room."
No one must enter but the Housekeeper her-
self. You may stand outside, and lean round
the sides of the open door, and peep in but
no more. There, you see large tea-canisters
of different sizes--and coffee-canisters--and
dark slate-blue paper bags--and polished
wooden spice-boxes, tall, and round, and un-
screwing in several places--and boxes of
raisins, and a fig-drum, and many packets of
different sizes, with a large white cone of loaf-
sugar standing in the midst--(we think the
Youngest Child of this family really must be al-
lowed to come in, and look about, but not touch

anything)--and light bundles of dry herbs
hanging from nails, and small baskets attached
to hooks, and half a German sausage, besides
three Bath chaps swinging by short strings
from nails on the edge of the top shelf; while,
ranged along the shelves, the Child sees a
beautiful array of white jam-pots and preserve
pots, and brown pickle jars, and wide-necked
glass bottles full of deep-coloured cherries, and
preserved gooseberries, plums, apricots, and
other fruits--with honey-jars, and tamarind-
jars; and beneath each shelf, a range of drawers
with brass handles, labelled outside with the
names of all the nicest, and some of the most
mysterious, things, in the eatable world.

What this period of the year is to THE
GARDENER, we may easily guess, from great
arms-full of mistletoe boughs, of holly-boughs
thick with berries, and of branches of laurel
which he is continually carrying into the
house, or going with as a present to neighbouring
houses. And now, see him coming
along with a bending back, bearing an entire
fir-tree, which gracefully nods its head as he
slowly trudges along, and shakes and rustles
all its dry brown cones, as if in dumb anti-
cipation of the peals of bells that will shortly
be rung! This fir is for the Christmas Tree--
the green and simple foundation and super-structure,
which is shortly destined to sustain
so much brightness and romance, so many
glittering presents, and to be the medium of
so many sweet feelings, joyous hopes, and
tender sense of childhood--in present bright
visions around us, and in tender recollections
of the past.

As for THE NURSE, there can be no doubt
but Christmas is a very anxious time for her.
She expects so many of the young folks will
make themselves very ill with all this quantity
of plum-pudding, and plum-cake, and mince-pies.
However, she consoles herself, on the
whole, for any extra trouble she may have in
pouring out, or mixing and stirring wine-glasses
of physic, and trying to conceal
powders in honey or red-currant jelly (and
then getting them down !) by the proud
recollection that she had the lady of the house
in her arms when a child; and this consciousness
makes her feel of the highest import-
ance in the family.

But THE DOCTOR--the medical attendant of
the family--there are no mixed feelings or
misgivings in his mind. He hears of all the
preparations--all the nice things--and shakes
his head gravely at the lady of the house; but
the instant he is outside the door, he hurries
homeward, rubbing his knuckles. He knows!

The black coat of THE VICAR has a richer
and more prominent tone of black, as he walks
across the broad snow of his seven-acre field,
towards the stile that leads into the lane that
runs to the vestry-door of the church. The
snow-covered hedges, with frosted twigs at top,
nod and glisten to him as he moves briskly
onward, pointing his Church-and-stately black
toe along the narrow path, beside the deep
cart-rut, with its rough, and jagged ridges.
Christmas to him is a series of dinners,
and " offerings," and good things, and compliments,
and wedding fees, and burial fees,
and christening fees, and charity sermons,
exhorting the rich to remember the poor,
and exhorting the poor to be meek and
contented, and trust to Providence. Meantime,
THE CURATE goes to tea-parties, and
has a great deal to do in the details of Church
business affairs, as the vestries are often
very troublesome; and has much to do in
visiting the sick, and administering religious
consolation, and riding on horseback to do
double duty--morning service,here--afternoon,
there--evening service, here again, or somewhere
else. This is the ordinary, regular,
hard-working, useful Curate; but if he be a
spruce young Puseyite Curate, in a black silk
sacerdotal dress-waistcoat, with a narrow,
stiff white neck-tie, and a black superfine
frock-coat, cut to the quick--then, he very
often rivals the Vicar in his dinner-parties,
and gives him the " go-by " in evening-parties,
where he clean carries off most of the young
ladies for a little intense talk of divine things,
in one corner of the room.

If Christmas be a great fact to THE BEADLE,
the Beadle seems a greater fact to Christmas.
New broad-cloth--new scarlet and gold--new
gold-laced cocked hat, of old Lord Mayor
fashion--new gold-headed cane--no wonder
that all the little charity boys eye his inflated
presence with additional awe! No wonder
that it is inflated; for he is swollen with
the substantial comforts derived from all
the great kitchens in the neighbourhood.
There is a roasted ox in his mind. He
can never forget the year when one was
roasted whole upon the ice, and he present,
and allowed to take his turn with the basting-ladle.
It was the epic event of his life.

The Beadle is generally able to frown
the charity boys into awe and silence;
assisting the said frown, every now and
then, with a few cuts of a long yellow
twining cane, during service; whereby, amidst
the sonorous tones of the preacher, there often
breaks out a squealing cry from the hollow
and remote aisles, or distant rows of heads in
the organ loft, to the great injury of the
eloquence of the pastor, and the gravity of
the junior portion of his congregation.

But though this parish Terror of the Poor
has portentous frowns for most of those under
his dominion, he knows how to patronise
with a smile, and his rubicund beams, at
all seasons of festival, and more especially
at Christmas, fall encouragingly upon all the
cooks of the best houses round about. Per-
haps, upon the chief Bell-ringer perhaps,
we may say, upon all the bell-ringers and
now and then upon the Sexton, with whom
he does a little private business, in the way
of gratuities from mourning relatives who
come to visit graves. But as for the Pew-
opener, envy of her gains at Christmas, and

her obduracy in concealing their extent,
renders him a foe to her existence, and
haughtily unconscious of her presence as often
as he can affect not to see her. There was,
once upon a time, a good Beadle, who married
a Pew-opener--but it was a long while ago--
so long, that it is thought to have been in the
good old--&c.

Christmas is not what it was to the POST-
MAN. The Government has interfered sadly
with his collection of "boxes" from house to
house; so that now he only receives gratefully
a shilling, here and there, in streets where
formerly he had but to announce, after a loud
double-rap, that " the Postman has called for
his Christmas-box! " and down came the
shilling, almost as a lawful right. He looks
melancholy as he sits on the bench outside a
country public-house; and when the Landlord
inquires the cause, he hints at the altered
times. But he does not get much sympathy
in this quarter; for THE PUBLICAN feels that
the alteration is considerably in his favour.
He has had a new beer-machine for his bar,
all beautiful with inlaid brass and ivory; he has
added a wing to his house, and he feels a proud
consciousness that, if all his town relations
live in " palaces," he is quite as important to
the sinners, his subjects, in the country.

To the CATTLE-DROVER this is a season of
arduous business, by day and by night, urging
his fatigued and often refractory beasts along
the dark roads; arid when they enter among
the many lights and glare of London, as they
sometimes do in the evening, what Christmas
is to the poor cattle, as well as the men, may
be conjectured; and all things considered, one
may fairly say the oxen have the worst of it.
THE SHEPHERD who is driving a flock of sheep
to the Christmas market, seldom sees much
amusement by the way; events with him are
rare; but the journey of the PIG-DROVERS up
to town is always a " chequered " history. One
pig or another is sure to be of an original
turn of mind, and several are sure to follow
his example for a little while, and then branch
off into a line of conduct suited exclusively to
their own individuality: under cart-wheels,
dodging round pumps, hiding noses behind
tree-trunks in the country, and behind theatri-
cal boards in the front of town shops; rushing
into hedges, and round haystacks, as the drove
moves unwillingly along lanes and roads; and
into wine-cellars, and round lamp-posts, and
up " all manner of streets " in London. THE
TURKEY-DROVER has also a very busy time of it
just now; and the GOOSE-DROVER far more.
The greater difficulty attending the flocks of
geese is not because they are so much more
numerous than the turkeys, as on account of
the perverse, irritable, and stupid conditions
of mind which alternate with the goose. It
is to be remembered that the warlike turkey-
cock (so aptly called in Scotland the bubbly-jock)
and the mature fierce-necked, wing-threaten-
ing, universally-assaulting gander, being pre-
served by their toughness, are not present in
these festive processions. We speak only of
the young and middle-aged turkey and goose;
but while we give the degree of difficulty in
their safe-conduct very much to the side of
the latter, we are almost disposed to agree
with the eminent poet, who has sung its
praises in another sense, finely combining with
that praise a kind of hint at a moral justifi-
cation for its death:

     "Of all the fowls that stock the farm,
         The Goose must be preferred;
     There is so much of nutriment
         In that weak-minded bird."

Christmas to THE BUTCHER is nothing less
than a bazaar of fine meat, displayed with all
the elegancies (they are not numerous) of
which his craft is susceptible. With a smil-
ing countenance and ruddy cheek he walks
backwards and forwards, through his shop
all hung with choice specimens of last year's
"grass "--the sun gleaming across them
by day, and the gas shining at night upon
the polished surfaces, and delicate white
fat, and sparkling amidst the branches of
holly, stuck about in all directions. He very
much approves of the vigorous way in which
one of his men continues to bawl in a sharp
quick tone " now then, t' buy! t' buy! " when
the most unlikely people, or when no people
at all, are passing. It all looks like business
and bustle.

THE BAKER stands amidst his walls of loaves,
built up, shelf upon shelf,--with other shelves
packed close with quartern and half-quartern
paper-bags of flour,--and he glances from the
topmost tier down to the flour-whitened trap-
door in one corner of his shop-floor, where-
from appears an ascending tray, heaped up
with long French rolls, cottage-loaves, twists,
rusks, and hot-spiced gingerbread-nuts. This
loaded tray continues to rise upon a man's
head, which is gradually followed by his body,
and the whole structure approaching the
counter is speedily unloaded. In less than
half an hour, all that was thus brought from
below has disappeared; the walls of loaves
have diminished in great gaps; more loaves
come smoking in, to supply their places, and
more trays of rolls, twists, gingerbread-nuts,
and fancy bread, with piles of biscuits, ascend
through the trap-door. The Baker has a
nice-looking daughter (as most bakers in
England have), and she now comes in
smiling, and displaying a row of pearly teeth,
and assists in taking money. They both agree
that although summer has its advantages,
there is no time of the year so pleasant as
Christmas.

THE GROCER is one of the most flourishing
men in all the world at this season. His
shop is a small and over-crowded epitome of
the produce of the East. He is evidently in
constant correspondence with China, has the
most "friendly relations" in India, is on
familial-terms with the Spice Islands, has
confidential friends in Egypt, Barbary, and

on " Candy's shore; " while, as to Jamaica,
and other West India Islands, he has a box,
a cask, or a case, by every post, to say nothing
of Arabia, France, Greece, Spain, Italy, and,
in fine, all the trading ports of the Mediter-
ranean Sea. To the Grocer we may fairly say
that Christmas is a general shaking by the
hand, with fingers extremely sticky, of foreign
relations and agents in every country, whence
something good to eat, in the shape of dried
fruits, spices, teas, coffees, sugars, preserves
and condiments, are possible to be procured.
If he has a newly-arrived Chinese picture,
inlaid caddy, monster idol, or tea-pot, now is
his time to make a feature of it in his window!

THE GREEN-GROCER is a genuine English-
man; he cannot boast of the foreign com-
modities of the tea-and-sugar mountebank
over the way. He has no wish to do it. He
deals entirely in home produce. All that he
sells, is the natural result of the cultivation,
of the soil of his native country: from celery,
beetroot, sea-kale, and cabbage-sprouts, to
Jerusalem artichokes and sage and onions.
All of English growth! He could very easily
hollow out a turnip; cut eyes, nose, and mouth
in it; stick a bit of candle inside; and then
set it up for a " show," all among the endive
and parsley, in the middle of his window on
Christmas Eve; but he scorns all such at-
tempts to attract public attention. It may be
very well for the Grocer over the way; but
that sort of thing won't do for a man who
deals in natural greens!

Christmas, to THE PASTRYCOOK, is the season
when the human mind, if well regulated, is
chiefly occupied in the contemplation of mince-
pies. Also in eating them, and decidedly in pay-
ing for them. But a very large consumption
of holiday plum-cakes is not the less expected
by the patriotic pastrycook. There is another
yet greater event in his mind, though he does
not break ground with this till after Christmas
Day; and that is, the advance of Twelfth
Night. While, therefore, he expects the public
to be solely occupied with mince-pies and
other seasonable matters, he is secretly at
work in the production of a full set (we forget
how many he told us made a set) of the
richest and most elaborately decorated and
"dramatised" Twelfth Cakes which the juve-
nile world of England has ever yet beheld.
The man's half crazy. His wife says he gets
no sleep with thinking of his cakes. The other
night he started up in bed, and cried out
'"Sugar-frost and whitening!" till his night-
cap stood on end. Though why on earth--as
the good lady remarked, on second thoughts,
"he should talk of whitening, she couldn't
form the remotest idea in life!"

No doubt Christmas is the season which
calls forth the most unmitigated hatred of
poachers in the breast of the patriotic
POULTERER. He says they are pests of society,
and the wickedest men going. There is no
excuse for strong fellows leading an idle life,
as most of the poachers do. It is worse than
idle; he calls it thievish and villanous. He
would be the last man in all England to
encourage such doings. On the contrary, he
would show them no mercy. Every man-
jack of them that could be caught, he would
send for two or three days to hard work on
Primrose Hill. After this they would be-
come better and wiser men; more industrious,
more cautious; not so full of talk in beer-
houses; more punctual and reliable; alto-
gether more useful members of society. But
as for his show of hares and other game, this
Christmas, he will warrant every one, as hav-
ing been honestly come by, and duly paid for,
and not too " high " for immediate eating.
What a capital show he makes this year! One
hundred and twenty long-legs (as he familiarly
calls the hares), three hundred rabbits, fifty
brace of pheasants, ninety brace of " birds,"
twenty brace of woodcocks, thirty brace of
snipe, a hundred and fifty brace of pigeons,
two hundred turkeys, three hundred geese,
with wild ducks, tame ducks, and barn-door
fowls innumerable! The inside of his shop
is full in every corner; from countless hooks,
hang rows of turkeys by the necks, and long
double chains of sausages and rows of ducks,
and rows of fowls, all dangling by the necks,
too, and in full feather; while his shelves
present compact arrays of fowls plucked and
trussed, and powdered, and blown up in the
breast with a blow-pipe: their livers and
gizzards tucked neatly, like opera-hats, under
their pinions. Rows of them, also, like small
batteries, front the street. The outside of his
house, even up to the second floor window, is
hung with hares, rabbits, pheasants, wild-
ducks, turkeys, and partridges.

But, if Christmas is a season of greatness to
some, of hilarity to many, of importance to all,
it is pre-eminently a season of equal anxiety
and splendour to THE COOK, Her long kit-
chen-range is a perfect bonfire, from morning
to night, while the various bright utensils
which are placed upon the chimney-piece and
on the walls at both sides of it, are profusely
interspersed with twigs and boughs of holly.
"Now, do get out of my way, all of you!
don't you see how much I have got on my
mind with this Christmas dinner! Where's
Jane?--Jane Stokes!--oh, the plague of
kitchen-maids! they're always out of the
way at the moment they're most wanted.
Barbara, are the vegetables washed?" "Not
yet, Cook!" It's always "not yet" with
them scullery-girls! Oh, how the Cook wishes
there were no need for any help from any
soul alive, if so be as she could but do every-
thing herself, which is that is where it is and
all about it! But the Christmas dinner don't
get spoiled; by no means--everything turns
out excellently, and compliments, like full-
blown cabbage-roses, are showered upon Cook
from the visitors of the hospitable board. They
are brought to her, as she sits wiping her fore-
head, and all her face and throat, in a cool and
remote corner. Her heart expands; she loves

all mankind; and she retires to rest, after a
small glass of cordial, at peace with herself and
all the world.

AN IDYL FOR CHRISTMAS
IN-DOORS.

"The houses were decked with evergreens in December,
that the Sylvan Spirits might repair to them, and remain
unnipped with frost and cold winds, until a .milder season
had renewed the foliage of their abodes." --BRAND'S
Popular Antiquities.

SCENE: --A room by twilight, on Christmas Eve: the fire
burning with a sleepy red. Branches of Holly, Laurel,
and Mistletoe, hanging on the walls. A Sylvan Spirit sitting
in each plant.

SPIRIT OF THE HOLLY.

THE icy streams are black and slow;
The icy wind goes sighing, sighing;
And far around, and deep below,
The great, broad, blank, unfeatured snow
On the idle earth is lying;
And the birds in the air are dying.
Just now, ere the day-beams fled,
Out of doors I thrust my head,
And saw the livid western light
Shrink up, like an eye bewitch'd,
At the staring of the Night.
The bare branches writhed and twitch'd;
And the holly-bushes old
Chatter'd among themselves for cold,
And scraped their leaves 'gainst one another,
And nestled close, like child with mother.
Ay, not all the globy fire
Of their berries, scarlet hot,
Which the mortals all admire,
Could their bodies warm a jot:
They look'd heavy and sad, God wot!
The nested birds sat close together,
'Plaining of the mournful weather;
And the tough and tangled hedges,
Near and distant, mark'd the track
Of the roadway, and the edges
Of the fields, with lines of black.
Soon I skipp'd, all shivering, back.
Here, beneath the sheltering eaves
Of the ceiling, dry and warm,
Air, like breath of Summer, weaves
In between my glossy leaves,
Doing me no harm:
And the CHRISTMAS spirit benign
Sparkles in my heart like wine.

SPIRIT OF THE LAUREL.

Gone is the Summer's warmth and light;
Gone are the rich, red Autumn days;
And Winter old, and Winter white,
Bits moodily in the open ways.
Like a great dumb marble statue,
'Bideth he upon the wold;
And his grey eyes, staling at you,
Make you also dumb with cold.
And the woods grow lean and swarth
In the vexings of the North;
Fill'd with sighings and lamentations
Of the winged forest nations,
Who, beneath their shatter'd bowers,
Wonder at the gusty showers,
And the length of the dark hours.
But the in-door year is bright
With the flush of CHRISTMAS light;
And the breath of that glad comer
Kindles with a second Summer,
In the which, blithe hearts are seen
Bursting into tenfold green.
Till they sit embover'd, mid sing
Under their own blossoming.
Therefore we, the woodland fairies,
Hold at present with the Lares,
Leaving Winter for the noon
Of this glowing household June;
Whereunto an added splendour
Preternatural we render,
Quickening,as with inward soul,
The intensely-burning coal.

SPIRIT OF THE MISTLETOE.

Behind the night young morn is sleeping,
And new hope underlies old weeping.
So, though all the woods are stark,
And the heavens are drowsy-dark,
Earth, within her shadows dun,
Swings about the golden sun,
Firm and steadily,
True and readily,
Strong in her pulses, every one.
In a deadly sleep she seems;
But her heart is full of dreams--
Full of dreaming and of vision,
Subtle, typical, Elysian,
Out of which, in time, shall rise
All the New Year's verities.
And the spirit within her veins
Laughs and leaps like April rains;
Warming with electric breath
The dark coldness underneath,
Where, close shut from human seeing,
Lie the secret nests of being,
And the embryo phantoms,--hosts
Of pale ante-natal ghosts,--
Bloodless germs of flowers and leaves,
From which the lady Spring receives,
When they wake to life, the flush
Of her many-colour'd blush.
Meanwhile, every shade of sadness
Melts away in CHRISTMAS gladness.
Green old CHRISTMAS! he doth bring
With him his peculiar Spring;--
Newly-germinating kindness,
Mutual help in human blindness,
Closing of old wounds, fresh greetings,
Souls a-flow at genial meetings,
Hovering fancies, loving laughter,
And the grave thoughts coming after;
All the lightness, brightness, dancing,
Interflowing, rainbow glancing.
Awful sweetness, wing'd with pleasure,
Of a heart that has no measure.

ALL.

Therefore will we here remain
Till the woods are green again,
And the sun makes golden glooms
In the forest's pillar'd rooms.
Here we ran abide together
Through the fire-lit CHRISTMAS weather,
And, though none may us descry,
Touch with sense of mystery
The hot feasting and loud joy,
Which, uncurb'd, themselves destroy,
And die childless: for true mirth,
Like the Heaven-embraced earth,
Should be large and full yet bound
By the haunted depths all round.

WHAT CHRISTMAS IS IN COUNTRY
PLACES.

IF we want to see the good old Christmas--
the traditional Christmas--of old England, we
must look for it in the country. There are
lasting reasons why the keeping of Christinas
cannot change in the country as it may in
towns. The seasons themselves ordain the
festival. The close of the year is an interval
of leisure in agricultural regions; the only
interval of complete leisure in the year; and
all influences and opportunities concur to
make it a season of holiday and festivity. If
the weather is what it ought to be at that
time, the autumn crops are in the ground;
and the springing wheat is safely covered up
with snow. Everything is done for the soil
that can be done at present; and as for the
clearing and trimming and repairing, all that
can be looked to in the after part of the
winter; and the planting is safe if done
before Candlemas. The plashing of hedges,
and cleaning of ditches, and trimming of
lanes, and mending of roads, can be got
through between Twelfth Night and the early
spring ploughing; and a fortnight may well
be given to jollity, and complete change.

Such a holiday requires a good deal of pre-
paration: so Christmas is, in this way also, a
more weighty affair in the rural districts than
elsewhere. The strong beer must be brewed.
The pigs must be killed weeks before; the
lard is wanted; the bacon has to be cured;
the hams will be in request; and, if brawn is
sent to the towns, it must be ready before the
children come home for the holidays. Then,
there is the fattening of the turkeys and geese
to be attended to; a score or two of them to
be sent to London, and perhaps half-a-dozen
to be enjoyed at home. When the gentle-
man, or the farmer, or the country shop-keeper,
goes to the great town for his happy boys-
and girls, he has a good deal of shopping to
do. Besides carrying a note to the haber-
dasher, and ordering coffee, tea, dried fruit,
and spices, he must remember not to forget the
packs of cards that will be wanted for loo and
whist. Perhaps he carries a secret order for
fiddlestrings from a neighbour who is practis-
ing his part in good time.

There is one order of persons in the country
to whom the month of December is any thing
but a holiday season--the cooks. Don't tell
us of town-cooks in the same breath! It is
really overpowering to the mind to think
what the country cooks have to attend to.
The goose-pie, alone, is an achievement to be
complacent about; even the most ordinary
goose-pie; still more, a superior one, with a
whole goose in the middle, and another cut
up and laid round; with a fowl or two,
and a pheasant or two, and a few larks put
into odd corners; and the top, all shiny with
white of egg, ligured over with leaves of
pastry, and tendrils and crinkle-crankles, with
a bunch of the more delicate bird feet standing
up in the middle. The oven is the cook's
child and slave; the great concern of her life,
at this season. She pets it, she humours it,
she scolds it, and she works it without rest.
Before daylight she is at it--baking her oat
bread; that bread which requires such perfect
behaviour on the part of the oven! Long lines
of oat-cakes hang overhead, to grow crisp
before breakfast; and these are to be put
away when crisp, to make room for others;
for she can hardly make too much. After
breakfast, and all day, she is making and
baking meat-pies, mince-pies, sausage-rolls,
fruit-pies, and cakes of all shapes, sizes, and
colours. And at night, when she can scarcely
stand for fatigue, she " banks " the oven fire,
and puts in the great jar of stock for the
soups, that the drawing may go on, from all
sorts of savoury odds and ends, while every-
thing but the drowsy fire is asleep. She
wishes the dear little lasses would not come
messing and fussing about, making ginger-
bread and cheesecakes. She would rather do
it herself, than have them in her way. But
she has not the heart to tell them so. On the
contrary, she gives them ginger, and cuts the
citron-peel bountifully for them; hoping, the
while, that the weather will be fine enough
for them to go into the woods with their
brothers for holly and ivy. Meantime, the
dairy-woman says, (what she declares every
Christmas,) that she never saw such a demand
for cream and butter; and that, before Twelfth
Night, there will be none. And how, at that
season, can she supply eggs by scores, as
she is expected to do? The gingerbread
baked, the rosiest-apples picked out from
their straw in the apple-closet, the cats, and
dogs, and canary birds, played with and fed,
the little lasses run out to see what the boys
are about.

The woodmen want something else than
green to dress the house with. They are
looking for the thickest, and hardest, and
knottiest block of wood they can find, that
will go into the kitchen chimney. A gnarled
stump of elm will serve their purpose best;
and they trim it into a size to send home.
They fancy that their holiday is to last as long
as this log remains; and they are satisfied
that it will be uncommonly difficult to burn
up this one. This done, one of them proceeds
with the boys and girls to the copses where
the hollies are thickest; and by carrying his
bill-hook, he saves a vast deal of destruction
by rending and tearing. The poor little birds,
which make the hollies so many aviaries in
winter, coming to feed on the berries, and to
pop in among the shining leaves for shelter,
are sadly scared, and out they flit on all sides,
and away to the great oak, where nobody will
follow them. For, alas! there is no real
mistletoe now. There is to be something so
called hung from the middle of the kitchen
ceiling, that the lads and lasses may snatch
kisses and have their fun; but it will have no
white berries, and no Druidical dignity about

it. It will be merely a bush of evergreen,
called by some a mistletoe, and by others the
Bob, which is supposed to be a corruption of
"bough." When all the party have got their
fagots tied up, and strung over their
shoulders, and button-holes, hats, and bon-
nets stuck with sprigs, and gay with berries, it
is time they were going home; for there is a
vast deal to be done this Christmas Eve, and
the sunshine is already between the hills, in
soft yellow gushes, and not on them.

A vast deal there is to be done; and es-
pecially if there is any village near. First,
there is to dress the house with green; and
then to go and help to adorn the church.
The Bob must not be hung up till to-morrow:
but every door has a branch over it; and the
leads of the latticed windows are stuck with
sprigs; and every picture-frame, and looking-
glass, and candlestick is garnished. Any
"scraps " (very young children) who are too
small to help, pick up scattered holly-leaves,
and, being not allowed to go upon the rug,
beg somebody to throw them into the fire;
whence ensues a series of cracklings, and
sputtering blazes, and lighting up of wide-open
eyes. In the midst of this--hark! is not that
the church bell? The boys go out to listen,
and report that it is so;--the " Christmas
deal " (or dole) is about to begin; so, off go
all who are able, up to the church.

It is very cold there, and dim, and dreary,
in spite of the candles, and the kindness, and
other good things that are collected there.
By the time the bell has ceased to clang, there
are a few gentlemen there, and a number of
widows, and aged men, and orphan children.
There are piles of blankets; and bits of
paper, which are orders for coals. One
gentleman has sent a bag of silver money;
and another, two or three sheep, cut up ready
for cooking; and another, a great pile of
loaves. The boys run and bring down a ladder
to dress the pillars; and scuffle in the galleries;
and venture into the pulpit, under pretence of
dressing the church. When the dole is done
and the poor people gone, the doors are
closed; and, if the boys remain, they must be
quiet; for the organist and the singers are
going to rehearse the anthem that is to be
sung to-morrow. If the boys are not quiet,
they are turned out.

There is plenty of bustle in the village.
The magistrates are in the long room of the
inn, settling justice business. The inn looks
as if it were illuminated. The waiters are
seen to glide across the hall; and on the
steps are the old constable, and the new rural
policeman, and the tax-collector, and the
postman. It is so cold that something
steaming hot will soon be brought for them
to drink; and the poor postman will be
taken on his weak side. Christmas is a
trying season to him, with his weak head,
and his popularity, and his Christmas-boxes,
and his constant liability to be reported.
Cold as it is, there are women flitting about;
or from the grocer's shop, and all
bringing away the same things. The grocers
give away, this night, to their regular
customers, a good mould candle each, and a
nutmeg. This is because the women must be
up by candle-light to-morrow, to make some-
thing that is to be spiced with nutmeg. So
a good number of women pass by with a
candle and a nutmeg; and some, with a
bottle or pitcher, come up the steps, and go
to the bar for some rum. But the clock strikes
supper-time, and away go the boys home.

Somebody wonders at supper whether
the true oval mince-pie is really meant
to be in the form of a certain manger; and
its contents to signify the gifts, various
and rich, brought by the Magi to that man-
ger. And while the little ones are staring at
this news, somebody else observes that it
was a pretty idea of the old pagans, in our
island, of dressing up their houses with evergreens,
that there might be a warm retreat
for the spirits of the woods in times of frost
and bitter winter storms. Some child peeps
timidly up at the biggest branch in the room,
and fancies what it would be to see some
sprite sitting under a leaf, or dancing along a
spray. When supper is done, and the youngest
are gone to bed, having been told not to
be surprised if they should hear the stars
singing in the night, the rest of the party
turn to the fire, and begin to roast their chestnuts
in the shovel, and to heat the elder-wine
in the old-fashioned saucepan, silvered
inside. One absent boy, staring at the fire,
starts when his father offers him a chestnut
for his thoughts. He hesitates, but his curiosity
is vivid, and he braves all the consequences
of saying what he is thinking about.
He wonders whether he might, just for once,
--just for this once--go to the stalls when
midnight has struck, and see whether the
oxen are kneeling. He has heard, and perhaps
read, that the oxen kneeled, on the first
Christmas-day, and kept the manger warm
with their breath; and that all oxen still
kneel in their stalls when Christmas-day
comes in. Father and mother exchange a
quick glance of agreement to take this seriously;
and they explain that there is now
so much uncertainty, since the New Style
of reckoning the days of the year was introduced,
that the oxen cannot be depended
on; and it is not worth while to be out
of bed at midnight for the chance. Some
say the oxen kneel punctually when Old
Christmas comes in; and if so, they will not
do it to-night.

This is not the quietest night of the year;
even if nobody visits the oxen. Soon after
all are settled to sleep, sounds arise which
thrill through some who are half-awakened
by them, and then, remembering something
about the stars singing, the children rouse
themselves, and lie, with open eyes and
feeling that Christmas morning has come.
They must soon, one would think, give up the

star theory; for the music is only two fiddles,
or a fiddle and clarionet; or, possibly, a fiddle
and drum, with a voice or two, which can
hardly be likened to that of the spheres. The
voices sing, " While shepherds watch'd their
flocks by night; " and then--marvellously
enough--single out this family of all the families
on the earth, to bless with the good
wishes of the season. They certainly are wishing
to master and mistress and all the young
ladies and gentlemen, "good morning," and
"a merry Christmas and a happy New Year."
Before this celestial mystery is solved, and
before the distant twang of the fiddle is quite
out of hearing, the celestial mystery of sleep
enwraps the other, and lays it to rest until the
morrow. The boys--the elder ones--meant
to keep awake; first, for the Waits, and afterwards
to determine for themselves whether
the cock crows all night on Christmas Eve, to
keep all hurtful things from walking the earth.
When the Waits are gone, they just remember
that any night, between this and Old Christmas,
will do for the cock, which is said to defy
evil spirits in this manner for the whole of
that season. Which the boys are very glad to
remember; for they are excessively sleepy; so
off they go into the land of dreams.

It is now past two; and at three the maids
must be up. Christmas morning is the one,
of all the year, when, in the North of England
especially, families make a point of meeting,
and it must be at the breakfast table. In
every house, far and near, where there is fuel
and flour, and a few pence to buy currants,
there are cakes making, which everybody must
eat of; cakes of pastry, with currants between
the layers. The grocer has given the nutmeg;
and those who can afford it, add rum, and
other dainties. The ladies are up betimes, to
set out the best candlesticks, to garnish the
table, to make the coffee, and to prepare a
welcome for all who claim a seat. The in-
fant in arms must be there, as seven o'clock
strikes. Any married brother or sister, living
within reach, must be there, with the whole
family train. Long before sunrise, there they
sit, in the glow of the fire and the glitter of
candles, chatting and laughing, and exchang-
ing good wishes.

In due time, the church-bell calls the flock
of worshippers from over hill, and down dale,
and along commons, and across fields: and
presently they are seen coming, all in their
best,--the majority probably saying the same
thing,--that, somehow, it seems always to be
fine on Christmas-day. Then, one may reckon
up the exceptions he remembers; and another
may tell of different sorts of fine weather that
he has known; how, on one occasion, his
daughter gathered thirty-four sorts of flowers
in their own garden on Christmas-day; and
the rose-bushes had not lost their leaves on
Twelfth Day; and then the wise will agree
how much they prefer a good seasonable frost
and sheeted snow like this, to April weather
in December.

Service over, the bell silent, and the sexton
turning the key in the lock, off run the young
men, out of reach of remonstrance, to shoot,
until dinner at least,--more probably until the
light fails. They shoot almost any thing that
comes across them, but especially little birds,
chaffinches, blackbirds, thrushes,--any winged
creature distressed by the cold, or betrayed by
the smooth and cruel snow. The little children
at home are doing better than their elder
brothers. They are putting out crums of
bread for the robins, and feeling sorry and
surprised that robins prefer bread to plum-pudding.
They would have given the robins
some of their own pudding, if they had but
liked it.

In every house, there is dinner to-day,--of
one sort or another,--except where the closed
shutter shows that the folk are out to dinner.
The commonest dinner in the poorer houses
--in some parts of the country--is a curious
sort of mutton pie. The meat is cut off a loin
of mutton, and reduced to mouthfuls, and
then strewed over with currants or raisins
and spice, and the whole covered in with a
stout crust. In some places, the dinner is
baked meat and potatoes: in too many cottages,
there is nothing better than a morsel of
bacon to flavour the bread or potatoes. But
it may be safely said that there is more and
better dining in England on Christmas-day
than on any other day of the year.

In the houses of gentry and farmers, the
dinner and dessert are a long affair, and soon
followed by tea, that the sports may begin.
Everybody knows what these sports are, in
parlour, hall, and kitchen:--singing, dancing,
cards, blind-man's buff, and other such games;
forfeits, ghost-story telling, snap-dragon;--
these, with a bountiful supper interposed, lasting
till midnight. In scattered houses, among
the wilds, card-playing goes on briskly. Wherever
there are Wesleyans enough to form a
congregation, they are collected at a tea-drinking
in their chapel; and they spend the
evening in singing hymns. Where there are
Germans settled, or any leading family which
has been in Germany, there is a Christmas-tree
lighted up somewhere. Those Christmas-trees
are as prolific as the inexhaustible cedars
of Lebanon. Wherever one strikes root, a
great number is sure to spring up under its
shelter.

However spent, the evening comes to an
end. The hymns in the chapel, and the carols
in the kitchen, and the piano in the parlour
are all hushed. The ghosts have glided by
into the night. The forfeits are redeemed.
The blind-man has recovered his sight, and
lost it again in sleep. The dust of the dancers
has subsided. The fires are nearly out, and
the candles quite so. The reflection that the
great day is over, would have been too much
for some little hearts, sighing before they slept,
but for the thought that to-morrow is Boxing-day;
and that Twelfth Night is yet to come.

But, first, will come New Year's Eve, with

its singular inconvenience (in some districts)
of nothing whatever being carried out of the
house for twenty-four hours, lest, in throwing
away anything, you should be throwing away
some luck for the next year. Not a potato-paring,
nor a drop of soap-suds or cabbage-water,
not a cinder, nor a pinch of dust,
must be removed till New Year's morning.
In these places, there is one person who
must be stirring early--the darkest man in
the neighbourhood. It is a serious thing
there to have a swarthy complexion and black
hair; for the owner cannot refuse to his
acquaintance the good luck of his being the first
to enter their houses on New Year's day. If
he is poor, or his time is precious, he is regularly
paid for his visit. He comes at day-break,
with something in his hand, if it is
only an orange or an egg, or a bit of ribbon,
or a twopenny picture. He can't stay a
minute,--he has so many to visit; but he
leaves peace of mind behind him. His friends
begin the year with the advantage of having
seen a dark man enter their house the first in
the New Year.

Such, in its general features, is Christmas,
throughout the rural districts of Old Eng-
land. Here, the revellers may be living in
the midst of pastoral levels, all sheeted
with snow; there, in deep lanes, or round
a village green, with ploughed slopes
rising on either hand: here, on the spurs of
mountains, with glittering icicles hanging
from the grey precipices above them, and the
accustomed waterfall bound in silence by the
frost beside their doors; and there again, they
may be within hearing of the wintry surge,
booming along the rocky shore; but the
revelry is of much the same character everywhere.
There may be one old superstition in
one place, and another in another; but that
which is no superstition is everywhere;--the
hospitality, the mirth, the social glow which
spreads from heart to heart, which thaws the
pride and the purse-strings, and brightens the
eyes and affections.

WHAT CHRISTMAS IS IN THE COMPANY OF JOHN DOE.

I HAVE kept (amongst a store of jovial,
genial, heart-stirring returns of the season)
some very dismal Christmases. I have
kept Christmas in Constantinople, at a
horrible Pera hotel, where I attempted
the manufacture of a plum-pudding from
the maccaroni-soup they served me for
dinner, mingled with some Zante currants,
and a box of figs I had brought from Smyrna;
and where I sat, until very late at night,
endeavouring to persuade myself that it was
cold and "Christmassy" (though it wasn't),
drinking Levant wine, and listening to the
howling of the dogs outside, mingled with
the clank of a portable fire-engine, which
some soldiers were carrying to one of those
extensive conflagrations which never happen
in Constantinople oftener than three times
a day. I have kept Christmas on board a
Boulogne packet, in company with a basin,
several despair-stricken females, and a damp
steward; who, to all our inquiries whether
we should be "in soon," had the one unvarying
answer of "pretty near" to give. I
have kept Christmas, when a boy, at a French
boarding-school, where they gave me nothing
but lentils and bouilli for dinner, on the
auspicious day itself. I have kept Christmas
by the bedside of a sick friend, and wished
him the compliments of the season in his
physic-bottles (had they contained another
six months' life, poor soul!) I have kept
Christmas at rich men's tables, where I have
been uncomfortable; and once in a cobbler's
shop, where I was excessively convivial. I
have spent one Christmas in prison. Start
not, urbane reader! I was not sent there for
larceny, nor for misdemeanor: but for debt.

It was Christmas-eve; and I--my name
is Prupper--was taking my walks abroad.
I walked through the crowded Strand, elate,
hilarious, benignant, for the feast was prepared,
and the guests were bidden. Such
a turkey I had ordered! Not the prize one
with the ribbons--I mistrusted that; but a
plump, tender, white-breasted bird, a king
of turkeys. It was to be boiled with oyster-sauce;
and the rest of the Christmas dinner
was to consist of that noble sirloin of roast
beef, and that immortal cod's head and
shoulders! I had bought the materials for
the pudding too, some half-hour previously:
the plums and the currants, the citron and
the allspice, the flour and the eggs. I was
happy.

Onward, by the bright grocer's shops,
thronged with pudding-purchasers! Onward,
by the bookseller's, though lingering, it
may be, for a moment, by the gorgeous
Christmas books, with their bright binding,
and brighter pictures. Onward, by the pastry
cook's! Onward, elate, hilarious, and benig-
nant, until, just as I stopped by a poulterer's
shop, to admire the finest capon that ever
London or Christmas saw, a hand was laid
on my shoulder!

"Before our sovereign lady the Queen"--
"by the grace of God, greeting"--"that you
take the body of Thomas Prupper, and him
safely keep"--"and for so doing, this shall be
your warrant."

These dread and significant words swam
before my dazzled eyelids, dancing maniac
hornpipes on a parchment slip of paper. I
was to keep Christmas in no other company
than that of the once celebrated fictitious per-
sonage, supposed to be the familiar of all
persons similarly situated--JOHN DOE.

I remembered with horror, that some fort-
night previously, a lawyer's clerk deposited
on my shoulder a slip of paper, which he
stated to be the copy of a writ, and in which
her Majesty the Queen (mixed up for the
nonce with John, Lord Campbell) was pleased

to command me to enter an appearance some-
where, by such a day, in order to answer the
plaint of somebody, who said I owed him
some money. Now, an appearance had not
been entered, and judgment had gone by
default, and execution had been obtained
against me. The Sheriff of Middlesex (who
is popularly, though erroneously, supposed
to be incessantly running up and down in
his bailiwick) had had a writ of fieri facias,
vulgarly termed fi. fa. against my goods;
but hearing, or satisfying himself by adroit
espionage, that I had no goods, he had made
a return of nulla bona. Then had he invoked
the aid of a more subtle and potential in-
strument, likewise on parchment, called a
capias ad satisfaciendum, abbreviated in legal
parlance into ca. sa., against my body. This
writ he had confided to Aminadab, his man;
and Aminadab, running, as he was in duty
bound to do, up and down in his section of
the bailiwick, had come across me, and had
made me the captive of his bow and spear. He
called it, less metaphorically, "nabbing me."

Mr. Aminadab, (tall, aquiline-nosed, olea-
ginous, somewhat dirty; clad in a green
Newmarket coat, a crimson velvet waist-
coat, a purple satin neckcloth with gold
flowers, two watch-guards, and four diamond
rings,)--Mr. Aminadab proposed that " some-
thing should be done." Would I go to White-
cross-street at once? or to Blowman's, in
Cursitor-street? or would I just step into
Peele's Coffee-house for a moment? Mr.
Aminadab was perfectly polite, and indefati-
gably suggestive.

The capture had been made in Fleet Street;
so we stepped into Peele's, and while Mr.
Aminadab sipped the pint of wine which he
had obligingly suggested I should order, I
began to look my position in the face. Exe-
cution taken out for forty-five pounds nine and
ninepence. Ca. sa., a guinea; fi.fa., a guinea;
capture, a guinea; those were all the costs
as yet. Now, some days after I was served
with the writ, I had paid the plaintiffs lawyer,
on account, thirty pounds. In the innocence
of my heart, I imagined that, by the County
Court Act, I could not be arrested for the
balance, it being under twenty pounds. Mr.
Aminadab laughed with contemptuous pity.

"We don't do business that way," said he;
"we goes in for the whole lot, and then yon
pleads your set-off, you know."

The long and the short of the matter was,
that I had eighteen pounds, twelve shillings,
and nine pence, to pay, before my friend in the
purple neckcloth would relinquish his grasp;
and that to satisfy the demand, I had exactly
the sum of two pounds two and a half-penny,
and a gold watch, on which a relation of mine
would probably advance four pounds more.
So, I fell to writing letters, Mr. Aminadab
sipping the wine and playing with one of his
watch-chains in the meanwhile.

I wrote to Jones, Brown, and Robinson--
to Thompson, and to Jackson likewise. I
wrote to my surly uncle in Pudding-lane.
Now was the time to put the disinterested
friendship of Brown to the test; to avail my-
self of the repeated offers of service from
Jones; to ask for the loan of that sixpence
which Robinson had repeatedly declared was
at my command as long as he had a shilling.
I sealed the letters with an unsteady hand,
and consulted Mr. Aminadab as to their de-
spatch. That gentleman, by some feat of
legerdemain, called up from the bowels of the
earth, or from one of those mysterious loca-
lities known as " round the corner," two
sprites: one, his immediate assistant; seedier,
however, and not jewelled, who carried a
nobby stick which he continually gnawed. The
other, a horrible little man with a white head
and a white neckcloth, twisted round his neck
like a halter. His eye was red, and his teeth
were gone, and the odour of rum compassed
him about, like a cloak. To these two acolytes
my notes were confided, and they were di-
rected to bring the answers like lightning to
Blowman's. To Blowman's, in Cursitor-street,
Chancery-lane, I was bound, and a cab was
straightway called for my conveyance thereto.
For the matter of that, the distance was so
short, I might easily have walked, but I could
not divest myself of the idea that everybody
in the street knew I was a prisoner.

I was soon within the hospitable doors of
Mr. Blowman, officer to the Sheriff of Middle-
sex. His hospitable doors were double, and,
for more hospitality, heavily barred, locked,
and chained. These, with the exceptions of
barred windows, and a species of grating-
roofed yard outside, like a monster bird-cage,
were the only visible signs of captivity. Yet
there was enough stone in the hearts, and
iron in the souls, of Mr. Blowman's inmates,
to build a score of lock-up houses. For that
you may take my word.

I refused the offer of a private room, and
was conducted to the coffee-room, where Mr.
Aminadab left me, for a while, to my own re-
flections; and to wait for the answers to my
letters.

They came--and one friend into the bargain.
Jones had gone to Hammersmith, and wouldn't
be back till next July. Brown had been dis-
appointed in the City. Robinson's money was
all locked up. Thompson expected to be locked
up himself. Jackson was brief, but explicit:
he said he " would rather not."

My friend brought me a carpet-bag, with
what clothes I wanted in it. He advised me,
moreover, to go to Whitecross Street at once,
for a sojourn at Mr. Blowman's domicile would
cost me something like a guinea per diem.
So,' summoning Mr. Aminadab, who had
obligingly waited to see if I could raise the
money or not, I announced my intention
of being conveyed to gaol at once. I paid
half-a-guinea for the accommodation I had
had at Mr. Blowman's; I made a pecuniary
acknowledgment of Mr. Aminadab s polite-
ness; and I did not fail to remember the

old man in the white halter and the
spirituous mantle. Then, when I had also
remembered a red-headed little Jew boy who
acted as Cerberus to this Hades, and appeared
to be continually washing his hands (though
they never seemed one whit the cleaner for the
operation), another cab was called, and off I
went to Whitecross Street, with a heart con-
siderably heavier than a paving-stone.

I had already been three hours in cap-
tivity, and it was getting on for eight o'clock.
The cab was proceeding along Holborn, and I
thought, involuntarily, of Mr. Samuel Hall,
black and grimy, making his progress through
the same thoroughfare, by the Oxford Road,
and so on to Tyburn, bowing to the crowd
and cursing the Ordinary. The foot-pave-
ment on either side was thronged with people
at their Christmas marketing, or, at least,
on some Christmas business--so it seemed
to me. Goose Clubs were being held at the
public-houses--sweeps for sucking-pigs, plum-
puddings, and bottles of gin. Some ladies and
gentlemen had begun their Christmas rather
too early, and were meandering unsteadily over
the flag-stones. Fiddlers were in great request,
being sought for in small beershops, and
borne off bodily from bars, to assist at Christ-
mas Eve merry-makings. An immense deal
of hand-shaking was going on, and I was very
much afraid, a good deal more " standing"
than was consistent with the strict rules of
temperance. Everybody kept saying that it
was " only once a year," and made that an
apology (so prone are mankind to the use of
trivial excuses!) for their sins against Father
Mathew. Loud laughter rang through the
frosty air. Pleasant jokes, innocent " chaff,"
passed; grocers' young men toiled lustily,
wiping their hot faces ever and anon;
butchers took no rest; prize beef melted away
from very richness before my eyes; and in
the midst of all the bustle and jollity, the
crowding, laughing, drinking, and shouting,
I was still on my unvarying way to White-
cross Street.

There was a man resting a child's coffin on a
railing, and chattering with a pot-boy, with
whom he shared a pot of porter, " with the
sharp edge taken off." There are heavy
hearts--heavier perchance than yours, in
London this Christmas Eve, my friend Prup-
per, thought I. To-morrow's dawn will bring
sorrow and faint-heartedness to many thou-
sands--to oceans of humanity, of which you
are but a single drop.

The cab had conveyed me through Smith-
field Market, and now rumbled up Barbican.
My companion, the gentleman with the
crab-stick (to whose care Mr. Aminadab had
consigned me) beguiled the time with pleasant
and instructive conversation. He told me that
he had " nabbed a many parties." That he had
captured a Doctor of Divinity going to a Christ-
mas, a bridegroom starting for the honeymoon,
a Colonel of Hussars in full fig for her Majesty's
drawing-room. That he had the honour once
of " nabbing'' the eldest son of a peer of the
realm, who, however, escaped from him through
a second-floor window, and over the tiles.
That he was once commissioned io "nab" the
celebrated Mr. Wix, of the Theatres Royal.
That Mr. Wix, being in the act of playing the
Baron Spolaccio, in the famous tragedy
"Love, Ruin, and Revenge," he, Crabstick,
permitted him, in deference to the interests
of the drama, to play the part out, station-
ing an assistant at each wing to prevent
escape. That the delusive Wix " bilked "him,
by going down a trap. That he, Crabstick,
captured him, notwithstanding, under the
stage, though opposed by the gigantic Wix
himself, two stage carpenters, a demon, and
the Third Citizen. That Wix rushed on the
stage and explained his position to the
audience, whereupon the gallery (Wix being
an especial favourite of theirs) expressed a
strong desire to have his (Crabstick's) blood;
and, failing to obtain that, tore up the
benches; in the midst of which operation the
recalcitrant Wix was removed. With these
and similar anecdotes of the nobility, gentry,
and the public in general, he was kind enough
to regale me, until the cab stopped. I
alighted in a narrow dirty street; was hur-
ried up a steep flight of steps; a heavy door
clanged behind me; and Crabstick, pocketing
his small gratuity, wished me a good night
and a merry Christmas. A merry Christmas:
ugh!

That night I slept in a dreadful place,
called the Reception ward,--on an iron bed-
stead, in a room with a stone floor. I was
alone, and horribly miserable. I heard the
Waits playing in the distance, and dreamed
I was at a Christmas party.

Christmas morning in Whitecross Street
Prison! A turnkey conducted me to the
"Middlesex side"--a long dreary yard--on
either side of which were doors leading into
wards, or coffee-rooms, on the ground floor,
and, by stone-staircases, to sleeping apart-
ments above. It was all very cold, very
dismal, very gloomy. I entered the ward
allotted to me, Number Seven, left. It was
a long room, with barred windows, cross
tables and benches, with an aisle between;
a large fire at the farther end; "Dum spiro,
spero," painted above the mantel-piece.
Twenty or thirty prisoners and their friends
were sitting at the tables, smoking pipes,
drinking beer, or reading newspapers. But
for the unmistakeable jail-bird look about the
majority of the guests, the unshorn faces, the
slipshod feet, the barred windows, and the
stone floor, I might have fancied myself in a
tap-room.

There was holly and mistletoe round the
gas-pipes; but how woful and forlorn they
looked! There was roast beef and plum-
pudding preparing at the fire-place; but they
had neither the odour nor the appearance of
free beef and pudding. I was thinking
of the cosy room, the snug fire, the well-

drawn curtains, the glittering table, the happy
faces, when the turnkey introduced me to the
steward of the ward (an officer appointed by
the prisoners, and a prisoner himself) who
"tallies you off," i.e., who allotted me a seat
at one of the cross-tables, which was hence-
forward mine for all purposes of eating,
drinking, writing, or smoking; in consideration
of a payment on my part of one guinea
sterling. This sum made me also free of the
ward, and entitled to have my boots cleaned,
my bed made, and my meals cooked. Supposing
that I had not possessed a guinea
(which was likely enough), I should have
asked for time, which would have been granted
me; but, at the expiration of three days,
omission of payment would have constituted
me a defaulter; in which case, the best thing
I could have done would have been to declare
pauperism, and remove to the poor side of the
prison. Here, I should have been entitled to
my " sixpences," amounting, in the aggregate,
to the sum of three shillings and sixpence a
week towards my maintenance.

The steward, a fat man in a green " wide-
awake " hat, who was incarcerated on remand
for the damages in an action for breach of
promise of marriage, introduced me to the
cook (who was going up next week to the
Insolvent Court, having filed his schedule
as a beer-shop keeper). He told me, that
if I chose to purchase anything at a species of
everything shop in the yard, the cook would
dress it; or, if I did not choose to be at the
trouble of providing myself, I might break-
fast, dine, and sup at his, the steward's, table,
"for a consideration," as Mr. Trapbois has it.
I acceded to the latter proposition, receiving
the intelligence that turkey and oyster-sauce
were to be ready at two precisely, with melan-
choly indifference. Turkey had no charms for
me now.

I sauntered forth into the yard, and passed
fifty or sixty fellow-unfortunates, sauntering
as listlessly as myself. Strolling about, I
came to a large grating, somewhat similar
to Mr. Blowman's bird-cage, in which was a
heavy gate called the " lock," and which
communicated with the corridors leading to
the exterior of the prison. Here sat, calmly
surveying his caged birds within, a turnkey--
not a repulsive, gruff-voiced monster, with a
red neckerchief and top boots, and a bunch
of keys, as turnkeys are popularly supposed
to be--but a pleasant, jovial man enough, in
sleek black. He had a little lodge behind,
where a bright fire burned, and where Mrs.
Turnkey, and the little Turnkeys lived. (I
found a direful resemblance between the
name of his office, and that of the Christ-
mas bird). His Christmas dinner hung to
the iron bars above him, in the shape of a
magnificent piece of beef. Happy turnkey,
to be able to eat it on the outer side of that
dreadful grating! In another part of the
yard hung a large black board, inscribed
in half-effaced characters, with the enumera-
tions of divers donations, made in former
times by charitable persons, for the benefit in
perpetuity of poor prisoners. To-day, so
much beef and so much strong beer was
allotted to each prisoner.

But what were beef and beer, what was
unlimited tobacco, or even the plum-pudding,
when made from prison plums, boiled in
a prison copper, and eaten in a prison
dining-room? What though surreptitious
gin were carried in, in bladders, beneath the
under garments of the fairer portion of
creation; what though brandy were smuggled
into the wards, disguised as black draughts,
or extract of sarsaparilla? A pretty Christ-
mas market I had brought my pigs to!

Chapel was over (I had come down too late
from the " Reception" to attend it); and the
congregation (a lamentably small one) dis-
persed in the yard and wards. I entered my
own ward, to change (if anything could change)
the dreary scene.

Smoking and cooking appeared to be the
chief employments and recreations of the
prisoners. An insolvent clergyman in rusty
black, was gravely rolling out puff-paste on a
pie-board; and a man in his shirt-sleeves,
covering a veal cutlet with egg and bread-
crum, was an officer of dragoons!

I found no lack of persons willing to enter
into conversation with me. I talked, full
twenty minutes, with a seedy captive, with a
white head, and a coat buttoned and pinned
up to the chin.

Whitecross Street, he told me (or Burden's
Hotel, as in the prison slang he called it), was
the only place where any " life " was to be
seen. The Fleet was pulled down; the
Marshalsea had gone the way of all brick-
aud-mortar; the Queen's Prison, the old
"Bench, " was managed on a strict system
of classification and general discipline; and
Horsemonger Lane was but rarely tenanted by
debtors; but in favoured Whitecross Street,
the good old features of imprisonment for
debt yet nourished. Good dinners were still
occasionally given; " fives " and football were
yet played; and, from time to time, obnoxious
attorneys, or importunate process-servers--
"rats " as they were called--were pumped
upon, floured, and bonneted. Yet, even White-
cross Street, he said with a-sigh, was falling
off. The Small Debts Act and those revolu-
tionary County Courts would be too many
for it soon.

That tall, robust, bushy-whiskered man, (he
said) in the magnificently flowered dressing-
gown, the crimson Turkish smoking cap, the
velvet slippers, and the ostentatiously dis-
played gold guard-chain, was a " mace-man:"
an individual who lived on his wits, and
on the want of wit in others. He had had
many names, varying from Plantagenet and
De Courcy, to " Edmonston and Co.," or plain
Smith or Johnson. He was a real gentleman
once upon a time--a very long time ago. Since
then, he had done a little on the turf, and a great
deal in French hazard, roulette, and rouge
et noir. He had cheated bill-discounters, and
discounted bills himself. He had been a
picture-dealer, and a wine-merchant, and one
of those mysterious individuals called a " com-
mission agent." He had done a little on
the Stock Exchange, and a little billiard-
marking, and a little skittle-sharping, and a
little thimblerigging. He was not particular.
Bills, however, were his passion. He was
under a cloud just now, in consequence of
some bill-dealing transaction, which the Com-
missioner of Insolvency had broadly hinted to
be like a bill-stealing one. However, he had
wonderful elasticity, and it was to be hoped
would soon get over his little difficulties.
Meanwhile, he dined sumptuously, and smoked
cigars of price; occasionally condescending to
toss half-crowns in a hat with any of the other
"nobs" incarcerated.

That cap, and the battered worn-out sickly
frame beneath, (if I would have the goodness
to notice them) were all that were left of a
spruce, rosy-cheeked, glittering young ensign
of infantry. He was brought up by an old
maiden aunt, who spent her savings to buy
him a commission in the army. He went
from Slowchester Grammar School, to Fast-
chester Barracks. He was to live on his pay.
He gambled a year's pay away in an evening.
He made thousand guinea bets, and lost
them. So the old denouement of the old
story came round as usual. The silver dress-
ing-case, got on credit--pawned for ready
money; the credit-horses sold; more credit-
horses bought; importunate creditors in the
barrack-yard; a letter from the colonel; sale
of his commission; himself sold up; then
Mr. Aminadab, Mr. Blowman, Burdon's Hotel,
Insolvent Court, a year's remand; and, an after
life embittered by the consciousness of wasted
time and talents, and wantonly-neglected op-
portunities.

My informant pointed out many duplicates
of the gentleman in the dressing-gown. Also,
divers Government clerks, who had attempted
to imitate the nobs in a small way, and had
only succeeded to the extent of sharing the
same prison; a mild grey-headed old gentle-
man who always managed to get committed
for contempt of court; and the one inevitable
baronet of a debtor's prison, who is tradition-
ally supposed to have eight thousand a year,
and to stop in prison because he likes it--
though, to say the truth, this baronet looked,
to me, as if he didn't like it at all.

I was sick of all these, and of everything
else in Whitecross Street, before nine o'clock,
when I was at liberty to retire to my cold
ward. So ended my Christmas-day--my
first, and, I hope and believe, my last Christ-
mas-day in prison.

Next morning my welcome friend arrived
and set me free. I paid the gate-fees, and I
gave the turnkeys a crown, and I gave the
prisoners unbounded beer. I kept New
Year's day in company with a pretty cousin
with glossy black hair, who was to have dined
with me on Christmas-day, and who took
such pity on me that she shortly became
Mrs. Prupper. Our eldest boy was born, by
a curious coincidence, next Christmas-day--
which I kept very jovially, with the doctor,
after it was all over, and we didn't christen
him Whitecross.

THE ORPHAN'S DREAM OF
CHRISTMAS.

IT was Christmas Eve--and lonely,
   By a garret window high,
Where the city chimneys barely
   Spared a hand's-breadth of the sky.
Sat a child, in age,--but weeping,
   With a face so small and thin,
That it seem'd too scant a record
   To have eight years traced therein.

Oh, grief looks most distorted
   When his hideous shadow lies
On the clear and sunny life-stream
   That doth fill a child's blue eyes!
But her eye was dull and sunken,
   And the whiten' d cheek was gaunt,
And the blue veins on the forehead
   Were the pencilling of Want.

And she wept for years like jewels,
   Till the last year's bitter gall,
Like the acid of the story,
   In itself had melted all;
But the Christmas time returned,
   As an old friend, for whose eye
She would take down all the pictures
   Sketch'd by faithful Memory,

Of those brilliant Christmas seasons,
   When the joyous laugh went round;
When sweet words of love and kindness
   Were no unfamiliar sound;
When, lit by the log's red lustre,
   She her mother's face could see,
And she rock'd the cradle, sitting
   On her own twin-brother's knee:

Of her father's pleasant stories;
   Of the riddles and the rhymes,
All the kisses and the presents
   That had mark'd those Christmas times
'Twas as well that there was no one
   (For it were a mocking strain)
To wish her a merry Christmas,
   For that could not come again.

How there came a time of struggling,
   When, in spite of love and faith,
Grinding Poverty would only
   In the end give place to Death;
How her mother grew heart-broken,
   When her toil-worn father died,
Took her baby in her bosom,
   And was buried by his side:

How she clung unto her brother
   As the lust spar from the wreck,
But stern Death had come between them
   While her arms were round his neck.
There were now no loving voices;
   And, if few hands offered bread,
There were none to rest in blessing
   On the little homeless head.

Or, if any gave her shelter,
   It was less of joy than fear;
For they welcomed Crime more warmly
   To the selfsame room with her.
But, at length they all grew weary
   Of their sick and useless guest ;
She must try a workhouse welcome
   For the helpless and distressed.

But she prayed; and the Unsleeping
   In His ear that whisper caught:
So he sent down Sleep, who gave her
   Such a respite as she sought;
Drew the fair head to her bosom,
   Pressed the wetted eyelids close,
And, with softly-falling kisses,
   Lulled her gently to repose.

Then she dreamed the angels, sweeping
   With their wings the sky aside,
Raised her swiftly to the country
   Where the blessed ones abide:
To a bower all flushed with beauty,
   By a shadowy arcade,
Where a mellowness like moonlight
   By the Tree of Life was made:

Where the rich fruit sparkled, star-like,
   And pure flowers of fadeless dye
Poured their fragrance on the waters
   That in crystal beds went by:
Where bright hills of pearl and amber
   Closed the fair green valleys round,
And, with rainbow light, but lasting,
   Were their glistening summits crown'd.

Then, that distant-burning glory,
   'Mid a gorgeousness of light!
The long vista of Archangels
   Could scarce chasten to her sight.
There sat One: and her heart told her
   'Twas the same, who, for our sin,
Was once born a little baby
   "In the stable of an inn."

There was music--oh, such music!--
   They were trying the old strains
That a certain group of shepherds
   Heard on old Judea's plains;
But, when that divinest chorus
   To a softened trembling fell,
Love's true ear discerned the voices
   That on earth she loved so well.

At a tiny grotto's entrance
   A fair child her eyes behold,
With his ivory shoulders hidden
   'Neath his curls of living gold;
And he asks them, "Is she coming?"
   But ere any one can speak,
The white arms of her twin brother
   Are once more about her neck.

Then they all come round her greeting;
   But she might have well denied
That her beautiful young sister
   Is the poor pale child that died;
And the careful look hath vanish'd
   From her father's tearless face,
And she does not know her mother
   Till she feels the old embrace.

Oh, from that ecstatic dreaming
   Must she ever wake again.
To the cold and cheerless contrast,--
   To a life of lonely pain?
But her Maker's sternest servant
   To her side on tiptoe stept;
Told his message in a whisper,--
   And she stirr'd not as she slept!

Now the Christmas morn was breaking
   With a dim, uncertain hue,
And the chilling breeze of morning
   Came the broken window through;
And the hair upon her forehead,
   Was it lifted by the blast,
Or the brushing wings of Seraphs,
   With their burden as they pass'd?

All the festive bells were chiming
   To the myriad hearts below;
But that deep sleep still hung heavy
   On the sleeper's thoughtful brow.
To her quiet face the dream-light
   Had a lingering glory given;
But the child herself was keeping
   Her Christmas-day in Heaven!

WHAT CHRISTMAS IS AFTER A
LONG ABSENCE.

SIXTEEN years have past since, a turbulent,
discontented boy, I left England for Australia.
My first serious study of geography began
when I twirled about a great globe to find
South Australia, which was then the fashion-
able colony. My guardians--I was an orphan
--were delighted to get rid of so troublesome
a personage; so, very soon I was the proud
possessor of a town and country lot of land in
the model colony of South Australia.

My voyage in a capital ship, with the best
fare every day, and no one to say " Charles,
you have had enough wine," was pleasant
enough: very different from the case of some
of my emigrating companions--fathers and
mothers with families, who had left good
homes, good incomes, snug estates, and re-
spectable professions, excited by speeches at
public meetings, or by glowing pamphlets,
descriptive of the charms of a colonial life in
a model colony. I learned to smoke, drink
grog, and hit a bottle swung from the yard-
arm, with pistol or rifle. We had several
very agreeable scamps on board; ex-cornets
and lieutenants, ex-government clerks, spoiled
barristers and surgeons, plucked Oxonians,
empty, good-looking, well-dressed fellows, who
had smoked meerschaums, drunk Champagne,
Hock, and Burgundy, fought duels, ridden
steeple-chases, and contracted debts in every
capital in Europe. These distinguished gen-
tlemen kindly took me under their patronage,
smoked my cigars, allowed me to stand treat
for Champagne, taught me, at some slight
expense, the arts of short whist, cart, and
unlimited loo; and to treat with becoming
hauteur any advances on the part of the inter-
mediate passengers.

By the end of the one hundred days of our
voyage, I was remarkably altered, but whether
improved, may be a question; as the leading
principles I had imbibed, were to the effect, that
work of any kind was low, and that debts were

gentlemanly. My preconceived notions of a
model colony, with all the elements of civi-
lisation, as promised in London, were rather
upset, by observing, on landing, just within
the wash of high-water, on the sandy beach,
heaps of furniture, a grand piano or two, and
chests of drawers in great numbers; and I
especially remember a huge iron-banded oak
plate-chest, half full of sand, and empty. The
cause of this wholesale abandonment was
soon made plain to me, in the shape of a
charge of ten pounds for conveying my trunks
in a bullock wagon, of which they formed less
than half the load, seven miles from the port
to the city of Adelaide;--the said city, which
looked so grand in water colours in the
Emigration Rooms in London, being at that
time a picturesque and uncomfortable collec-
tion of tents, mud huts, and wooden cottages,
curiously warped, rather larger than a New-
foundland dog's kennel, but letting for the
rent of a mansion in any agricultural county
of England.

It is not my intention, now, to tell the
tale of the fall of the Model Colony and
colonists of South Australia, and the rise
of the Copper Mines, which I did not stay
to see. When a general smash was taking
place on all sides, I accepted the offer of
a rough diamond of an overlander, who
had come across from the old colony with a
lot of cattle and horses to sell to the
Adelaideans. He had taken a fancy to me
in consequence of the skill I had displayed in
bleeding a valuable colt at a critical moment;
one of the few useful things I had learned in
England; and, when my dashing companions
were drinking themselves into delirium tremens,
enlisting in the police, accepting situations as
shepherds, sponging for dinners on the once-despised
"snobs" and imploring the captains
of ships to let them work their way home
before the mast, he offered to take me with
him to his station in the interior, and "make
a man of me." I turned my back on South
Australia, and abandoned my country lot, on
an inaccessible hill, to nature, and sold my
town lot for five pounds. I began to perceive
that work was the only means of getting
on in a colony.

Accordingly, into the far Bush I went, and
on the plains of a new-settled district, all
solitary; constantly in danger from savage
blacks; constantly occupied in looking after
the wild shepherds and stockmen (herdsmen)
of my overland friend; passing days on horseback
at one period; at another, compelled to
give my whole attention to the details of a
great establishment,--I rubbed off my old skin.

My fashionable affectations died away; my
life became a reality, dependent on my own
exertions. It was then that my heart began to
change; it was then that I began to think
tenderly of the brothers and sisters I had left
behind, and with whom I had communicated
so little in the days of my selfishness. Rarely
oftener than twice in a year could I find
means to forward letters; but the pen, once so
hateful to me, became now, in hours of leisure,
my great, resource. Often and often have
I sat in my hut at midnight, filling pages
with my thoughts, my feelings, my regrets.
The fire burning before my hut, where my
men were sleeping, reminded me that I was
not alone in the great pastoral desert, which
sloping away from my station, rolled for hun-
dreds of miles. Every sound was redolent of
the romance of the strange land to which I had
transplanted myself. The howl of the dingo
prowling round my sheep-folds; the defying
bark of my watchful dogs; the cry of the
strange night-birds; and sometimes, echoing
from the rocky ranges, the wild mountainous
songs of the fierce aborigines, as they danced
their corrobberies, and acted dramas repre-
senting the slaughter of the white man, and
the plunder of his cattle. When such
noises met my ear, I looked up to the rack
where my arms lay, ready loaded, and out to
where a faithful sentinel, the rebel O'Donohue,
or the poacher, Giles Brown, with musket on
shoulder paced up and down, ready to die, but
not to surrender. In this great desert, the petty
cares, mean tricks of land jobbing, all the little
contrivances for keeping up appearances no
longer needed, were forgotten. My few books
were not merely read; they were learned by
heart. If in the morning I tired horses in
galloping my rounds, and settled strife among
my men with rude words, and even blows; in
the evening, sitting apart, I was lost in the
wanderings of Abraham, the trials of Job, or
the Psalms of David.

I followed St. John into the wilderness,
not unlike that before my eyes, and listened
far from cities to the Sermon on the mount.
At other times, as I paced along the open
forests, I made the woods resound with the
speeches of Homer's heroes, or the outbursts
of Shakspeare's characters--outbursts that
came home to me: for, in those lone regions,
I was chief, warrior, and almost priest; for,
when there was a death, I read the funeral
service. And thus I educated myself.

While thus recalling friends neglected, and
opportunities misused, and pleasant scenes of
Eastern County life, I most loved to dwell upon
the Christmas time of dear old England.

In our hot summer of Australian December,
when the great river that divided and bounded
my pastures drivelled to a string of pools,
and my cattle were panting around at the
quiet hour of the evening, when the stars,
shining with a brilliancy unknown in northern
climes, realised the idea of the blessed night
when the star of Bethlehem startled and
guided the kings of the Eastern world on their
pious pilgrimage,--my thoughts travelled
across the sea to England. I did not feel the
sultry heat, or hear the cry of the night-
bird, or the howl of the dingoe. I was across
the sea, among the Christinas revellers. I
saw the gay flushed faces of my kindred and
friends shining round the Christmas table; the

grace was said, the toast went round. I heard
my own name mentioned, and the
grew sad. Then I awoke from my dream and
found myself alone, and wept. But in a life of
action there is no time for useless grieving,
though time enough for reflection and resolu-
tion. Therefore, after visions like these, I
resolved that the time should come when,
on a Christmas-day, the toast " to absent
friends" should be answered by the Australian
himself.

The time did come--this very year of the
half century. Earnest labour and sober eco-
nomy had prospered with me. The rich
district in which I was one of the earliest
pioneers, had become settled and pacified,
as far as the river ran; the wild MyaIs
had grown into the tame, blanket-clothed
dependents of the settlers. Thousands of
fine-woolled flocks upon the hills, and cattle
upon the rich flats, were mine; the bark
hut had changed into a verandahed cottage,
where books and pictures formed no in-
significant part of the furniture; neighbours
were within a ride; the voices of children
often floated sweetly along the waters of the
river.

Then said I to myself, I can return now.
Not to remain; for the land I have conquered
from the wilderness shall be my home for life:
but I will return, to press the hands that
have longed for many years to press mine; to
kiss away the tears that dear sisters shed
when they think of me, once almost an outcast;
to take upon my knees those little ones who
have been taught to pray for their " uncle in
a far land across the broad deep sea." Per-
haps I had a thought of winning some rosy
English face and true English heart to share
my pastoral home.

I did return, and trod again the shores of
my mother country. My boyish expectations
had not been realised, but better hopes had.
I was not returning laden with treasures, to
rival the objects of my foolish youthful vanity;
but I was returning thankful, grateful, con-
tented, independent, to look round once more
on my native land, and then return to settle
in the land of my adoption.

It was mid-winter when I landed at a small
fishing village in the extreme west of England;
for my impatience made me take advantage,
during a calm in the Channel, of the first
fisher's boat that boarded us.

The nearer we approached the shore, the
more impatient I grew to land. I insisted on
giving my help to one of the heavy oars; and
no sooner had we touched the ground, than,
throwing myself into the water, I waded on
shore. Oh, easy-going men of the great world,
there are some pleasures you can never taste;
and among them is the enthusiasm, the heart-
felt, awe-stricken admiration of the dweller
among pastoral plains when he finds himself
once more at home among the gardens of
England!

Garden is the only word to express the
appearance of England, especially the west,
where the bright green myrtle lingers through
the winter, and the road-side near every town
is bordered with charming cottages. At every
mile I found some new object of admiration,
above all, the healthful fresh cheeks of the
people; especially the sturdy, yet delicate-com-
plexioned lasses tripping away, basket in hand,
from the markets in numbers, startling to one
who had lived long where the arrival of one
fair white face was an event.

The approach to the first great town was
signalised by tokens less pleasing--nay, ab-
solutely painful;--beggars, as I passed, stood
in their rags and whined for alms; and others,
not less pitiful in appearance, did not beg, but
looked so wan and miserable, that it made my
heart bleed. I gave to all, so that the man who
drove me stared. He stared still more, when
I told him that I came from a country where
there were no poor, save the drunken and
the idle.

Entering a great town, the whirl, the com-
motion of passers on foot, on horseback, and in
vehicles of all kinds, made me giddy; it was
like a sort of nightmare. The signs of wealth,
the conveniences provided for every imaginable
want, were very strange to me, fresh from a
country where able-bodied labour was always
in demand, while a man thought himself
equal to the longest journey, through an
untrodden country, with a blanket and a tin-
pot for all his furniture, and all his cooking
apparatus.

When I called in the landlord of the Inn to
consult about getting on to Yorkshire in two
days, as I wished to be with my friends as soon
as possible, he said, " If you stay and rest
to-night, you can get there by the railroad to-
morrow morning, in good time to eat your
Christmas dinner." I had never thought of
that, and had only a vague idea what a
railroad was like.

I reached the starting-place next morning,
just in time to take my seat in a departing
train. I started when, with a fearful sound of
labouring machinery, we moved: then whirled
away. I was ashamed of my fears; yet there
were many in that train to whom a sea voyage
would have only been less terrible than the
solitary land journeys on horseback through
the Bush of Australia, which were to me a
mere matter of course. Without accident, I
reached the station near York, where I had
to take a conveyance to reach by a cross
country road the house where I knew that
one of my brothers, farming a few hundred
acres of his own land, assembled as many of
our family as possible at Christmas time.

The little inn was able to supply a gig, driven
by a decayed post-boy. Plunging at once
into questioning conversation, I found an old
acquaintance in the driver, without revealing
who I was. Not many years older than my-
self, soured, disappointed, racked in health, he
took a different view of life to anything I had
yet heard. All along my road through Eng-

land I had been struck by the prosperous
condition of the well-to-do people I had met
in first-class carriages. His occupation, his
glory, was departed; he was obliged to do
anything, and wear anything, instead of his
once smart costume, and once pleasant occu-
pation--instead of his gay jacket, and rapid
ride, and handsome presents from travellers,
and good dinners from landlords. In doleful
spirits, he had a score of tales to tell of
others worse off than himself--of landlords of
posting-houses in the workhouse, and smart
four-in-hand coachmen begging their bread
of farmers sunk down to labourers; and other
doleful stories of the fate of those who were
not strong enough for the race of life in
England. Then I began to see there are
two sides to the life that looked so brilliant
out of the plate-glass windows of a first-class
carriage.

The luxuries and comforts which taxes and
turnpikes buy, are well worth the cost to those
who can pay them; those who cannot, will do
better to make shift in a colony. Thus think-
ing and talking, as I approached the place
where, unexpected, I was to appear before a
gathering of my relations, my flow of spirits
died away. The proud consciousness of having
conquered fortune, the beauty of the winter
scenery (for winter, with its hoar frost shading
the trees and foliage, has strange dazzling
beauty to the eyes of those who have been
accustomed to the one perpetual green-brown
of semi-tropical Australia) had filled me full
to overflowing with bounding joyousness.
Gaily I answered back to the " Good night,
master," of the passing peasantry, and vigor-
ously puffed at my favourite pipe, in clouds
that rivalled and rolled along with the clouds
of mist that rose from the sweating horses.
But the decayed postilion's stories of misery,
in which he seemed to revel, damped me. My
pipe went out, and my chin sunk despoud-
ingly on my breast. At length I asked, " Did
he know the Barnards? " " Oh, yes, he knew
them all." Mr. John had been very lucky
with the railroad through one of his farms.
He had ridden a pair at Miss Margaret's
wedding, and driven a mourning coach at
Miss Mary's funeral. The mare in the gig
had belonged to Mr. John, and had been a
rare good hunter. Mr. Robert had doctored
him for his rheumatics. " Did he know any
more ? " " Oh, yes; there was Master Charles;
he went abroad somewhere to furren parts.
Some people say he's dead, got killed, or
hung, or something; and some say he's made
a power of money. He was a wild slip of a
lad. Many a time he's been out in the roads
with some one I know very well, snaring
hares and smoking of pheasants. There's a
mark on my forehead now, where I fell, when
he put a furze bush under the tail of a colt I
was breaking. He was a droll chap, surely."
There was scarcely a kind feeling in the poor
man's breast. The loss of his occupation,
poverty, and drink, had sadly changed the fine
country lad, barely ten years older than myself,
whom I had left behind in England. So,
turning, I said, " Well, Joe, you don't seem to
remember me; I am Charles Barnard."
"Lord, sir!" he answered, in a whining tone,
"I beg your pardon. You are a great gen-
tleman; I always thought you would be.
So, you are going to dine with Mr. John?
Well, sir, I hope you won't forget a Christmas-box,
for old acquaintance sake? " I was
repelled, and wished myself back in Australia;
my mind began to misgive me as to the wisdom
of my unexpected visit.

It was bright moonlight when we drove
into the village. I had a mile to walk; I
would not let chattering Joe drive me; so left
him happy over a hot supper, with no
stinted allowance of ale. I walked on quickly,
until approaching the old house--the mansion-house,
once, but the estates had long been
divided from it--I paused. My courage
failed as I passed through the gate; their
clang disturbed the dogs they began to bark
fiercely. I was a stranger; the dogs that
knew me were all dead. Twice I paced
round, with difficulty repressing my emotion,
before I could find courage to approach the
door. The peals of laughter, the gay music
that rang out from time to time, the lights
flying from window to window of the upper
rooms, filled me with pleasing-painful feelings,
long unknown. There was folly in my mysterious
arrival; but romance is part of a life
of solitude. Unreasonably, I was for a moment
vexed that they could be so merry; but
next moment better thoughts prevailed. I
stepped to the well-remembered door, and
rang a great peal; the maid opened it to me
without question, for many guests were expected.
As I stooped to lay aside my cloak
and cap, a lovely child in white ran down the
stairs, threw her arms round my neck, and,
with a hearty kiss, cried, "I have caught you
under the mistletoe, cousin Alfred." Then
she started from me, and loosening her hold,
and staring at me with large timid brown eyes,
said, "--Who are you? you are not a new
uncle, are you? " Oh, how my heart was
relieved! the child saw a likeness; I should
not be disowned. All my plans, all my preparations
were forgotten; I was in the midst of
them; and after fifteen years I saw again the
Christmas fire, the Christmas table, the
Christmas faces, that I had dreamed of so
often! To describe that night is impossible.
Long after midnight, we sat; the children
unwillingly left my knees for bed; my brothers
gazed and wondered; my sisters
crowded round me, kissed my brown-bearded
cheeks, and pressed my sun-burned hands.
Many new scenes of blessed Christmas may
I have; never one like that which welcomed
the wanderer home!

But although England has its blessed sea-
sons and festivals, in which Christmas-day
stands first; and, although that Christmas
meeting will often and again be before my


eyes, I cannot stay in England. My life is
molded to my adopted country; and where
I have earned fortune, there I will spend it.
The restraints, the conventionalities, the
bonds created by endless divisions of society,
are more than I can endure; care seems to
sit on every brow, and scornful pride in
imaginary social superiority on too many.

I have found the rosy English face, and the
true English heart! Some one who listened to
the Australian stories of my Christmas week,
which my friends were never tired of hearing,
is ready to leave all and follow me to my
pastoral home. I am now preparing for
departure; and neither society, nor books,
nor music, will be wanting in what was,
when I first knew it, a forest and grassy
desert, peopled with wild birds and kanga-
roos. Nearly twenty relations accompany
me; some of them poor enough. In a few
years you may find the Barnard-town settle-
ment on Australian maps; and there, at
Christmas time, or any time, true men and
good women shall meet with welcome and help
from me, for I shall never forget that I once
began the world, a shepherd in a solitude,
and gazed on the bright stars of a Christmas-
night, shining in a hot and cloudless sky.

WHAT CHRISTMAS IS IF YOU OUT
GROW IT.

THE floods round the little classic town of
Bulferry were frozen. The trees round the
meadows of St. Agnus Dei de Pompadour
were the same. Dons went to chapel regularly,
but the Dean of St. Agnus appeared in an
extensive funeral-looking cloak, and the Sub-
Dean coughed louder, and made more mis-
takes in the responses, by reason of deafness,
than heretofore. Coal and Blanket Societies
were talked of. In few words, Christmas was
fast approaching, and University men were
looking forward to spending that season in
town or country, according to their residence,
inclinations, or invitations.

Among the many young men who stood
on the platform, awaiting the blazing dragon,
which in two hours' time was to convey them,
to London, perhaps to take a chop at the
"Cock," a little dinner at Verrey's, and a three-
and-sixpenny cab-fare to some other station,
was Mr. Horace De Lisle, a freshman, who
had come "up" in the preceding October,
and was now hastening back to the paternal
hearth at St. Maurice, a charming little
vicarage in Warwickshire, just large enough
to be the best house in the village, just small
enough to be sociable, allowing of half-a-dozen
spare beds. Practically religious, without
any morbid affectation of any " isms,"
the Rev. Augustus De Lisle was the best
and most popular parson for miles round.
His income might be some four hundred a
year, besides a little property in the funds;
but judicious economy, and a little success in
"gentleman farming," made it go very far,
and St. Maurice rectory boasted its occasional
dinner party, its billiard room, and its plain
carriage; while few of the poor or sick ever
went away unrelieved. Mrs. De Lisle was
good and clever woman, and educated her own
daughters; which saved money and morals at
the same time.

However, like the generality of clergymen
who have not much preferment, and who
really do good, the Rev. Augustus De Lisle
had a large family. Girls, even when edu-
cated at home, cost something; boys cost a
great deal more, and cannot be kept at home.
Two or three had been got off his hands, but
Horace had been a pet boy, kept at home a
good deal through ill health. He was very
amiable, loved his sisters and mother, and his
father had made him a capital scholar. Several
people were surprised when he took the St.
Agnus Dei scholarship, and took the " bounce '
out of the Tipton and Whortleberry boys at
the same time.

And so Horace had been sent to the Uni
versity, with the promise of eighty or a
hundred pounds a year from his father, an
odd present of fifty from an aunt, and a lot of
tears, blessings, and hints at advice from his
mother. He had now passed his first term.
He had made up his mind to take a " double
first," the Iceland scholarship, and the English
verse; he found Arnold's Thucydides a very
stupid book, and wondered how it was that
nothing " took " in the publishing way, unless
it was " translated from the German." He
believed in " stunning feeds," and began to
have some ideas on the subject of claret.

But he had still far too much love for home
to find even a lingering inclination for a further
stay. Moreover, ambition seemed to send him
homeward. The Dean had said, in a gruff
voice, "Very well, sir!" to his construing of
the "Birds" of Aristophanes; the Rev. John
o' Gaunt, his tutor, had expanded his lank lips
into a smile, and had commended his Latinity;
and here was news for his father! Again,
he wanted to see Jack Harrowgate, his old
shooting companion, to whom his favourite
sister Lucy was engaged. Jack was a tre-
mendous rough manly fellow, with a very
kind heart, and great powers of sociability.
Even Bruiser, of St. Alb-Cornice, who had
thrashed the "Bunstead Grinder," shrank
into insignificance when compared with Jack;
and Smillington, of St. Una de Lion, could
not sing, "Down among the dead men," half so
well. Besides all this, Horace had some few
private anxieties and doubts--of which anon.



Great as was the readiness and frequency
with which slang phrases were bandied to
and fro at the University, there was one little
word which seemed more in use than any,
and which half the University appeared to
be living to illustrate.

When Horace first appeared at St. Agnus
Dei, one of his first proceedings was to pay
for his furniture; and to purchase the good-
will of the cups and saucers of the last

inmate of his rooms. Several other ready-
money transactions, on a small scale, evinced
his desire and intention of avoiding debt;
and as his father had not only advised him to
do so, but had furnished him with the means
of eking out the small allowance of his
scholarship, he himself felt ill-justified in
overrunning his known income.

But that word was sounding, ringing,
dinning, and booming in his ears, hour after
hour, day after day. That word was staring
in his face; whizzing before his eyes; insinu-
ating itself into his food; adulterating the
wine he drank. It stared at him in the form
of one man's boots (so much better fitting
than old Last's, at St. Maurice); in the broad
stripe of another man's elegantly-cut trousers;
in the glossy hat of another; in the faultless,
close-to-the-waste-when-unbuttoned dress coat
of another. It took all sorts of forms. It
would transfer itself into a walking-cane, at
one end of a street; and at the end of
another, it had suddenly become a plaid scarf,
or a coral-headed breast-pin. Sometimes it
would appear as a Yorkshire pie; sometimes
as a musical box. At one moment, just as
he thought it was a pair of hair-brushes, it
would suddenly turn itself into a steak and
oyster sauce at Cliften's. In the dreams of
men, it would haunt them; in their walks, it
would cling to their very feet; in their
reading moments, it lay open before them;
in their smoking ones, it fumed with them.
And that word was tick, tick, TICK.

But Horace was not in debt. Oh no! He
had only commenced a few accounts for
things which " one could not very well pay for
till the end of term;" and when the end of
term came, he found he was obliged to write
home for five pounds to come home with, and
this, as it was his first term, his father thought
nothing of. Then, he had " been obliged" to
order "one or two things" at Stilty and
Cabbagenet, the great tailor's; but there could
be no harm in that, because their names were
put down on the list of tradesmen his tutor
had handed him. Then, there were one or two
little presents for his sisters, and a ring and
a new watch-chain, which " he could pay for
next term," and one or two other matters--
but "nothing of consequence."

If you had seen how Horace kissed his
sisters and mother, and how happy and how
jolly he seemed when he got home, you would
have been pleased, I think. He was certainly
more manly in speech and manner, and
more confident in expressing opinions; but
he had lost none of his social frankness and
good-nature. But Christmas was getting
lose at hand, and Horace, somehow or other,
did not evince so lively an interest in the
reparations for it as formerly. He said
something in reference to " their always boring
about mince-meat;" and he thought the charity-
school dinner might be managed cheaper and
with less trouble at the school-house, than in
their own kitchen.

Moreover, his father could scarcely under-
stand the necessity of his reading in a bright-
coloured chintz gown, lined with bright red
silk, although his sisters thought it very
pretty. His mother was afraid that his set of
studs, representing little bunches of jewelled
grapes, must have been rather expensive--
"But then, he had always been a quiet boy at
home, and would not do so again." He also
drank more wine, and once laughed about
"boys taking two glasses of port after dinner;"
he ordered some pale ale up from London;
and abused tea as ditch-water, alleging that it
hurt his nerves, and prevented him from read-
ing. He called his pony a "mere hack," and
showed discrimination in matters relating to
horseflesh.

But all these were minor difficulties, and
Horace had too much real goodness of heart
to ask his father for more money, or to
obtrude his artificial wants except in fits of
occasional peevishness. Besides, the Bishop
of St. Epps was so pleased with his dbut at
St. Agnus Dei, that he had obtained for him
an " exhibition," which put another thirty
pounds a-year into his pocket. This comforted
him on the score of his present experiments
with TICK.

Christmas passed away, merrily. The house
was a perfect bower of holly; good, whole-
some dinners, and lively hearty parties in
the evening, " kept" the St. Maurice Christ-
mas in genuine, downright style. And then
came more junketing. Laura, thinking that
there was no particular occasion to run away
to the Lakes, as if marriage were a wicked
action, said " yes " one evening to a curious
question of Jack Harrington's, and absolutely
got married next week. You may fancy what
everybody said and did upon that occasion!

And now came the time for Horace to go
back. Despite the domesticity of home,
despite the absence of cold ducks at break-
fast, of claret after dinner, and of lobster salad
for supper  despite the rough want of
etiquette, which led Jack Harrington to dance
with his own wife, to prefer the ale of the
St. Maurice and the Goat to Bass or All-
sopp, and to drink healths at his own dinner
parties,--Horace had not found so sincere, or
so soundly rational a companion at college.
He went back and with some regrets.

             * * * * * * *

It is a full three years, perhaps a trifle more,
since Horace spent Christmas at his parental
home. Many changes have taken place in
that time. Laura is getting matronly on the
strength of baby Number Two. Jack is get-
ting additionally serious; looks more sharply
after business; and gives fewer (though not
less sociable) parties. The Reverend the Vicar
of St. Maurice has got a small prebend, with
the profits of which, he has insured his life in
favour of three yet unmarried daughters. This
Christmas at St. Maurice bids fair to rival
all past Christmases in jollity, merriment,
and social delight. Jack has just cleared
a few hundreds by a lucky hit of judicious
speculation, and declares he will spare no
expense in celebrating baby Number One's
second birth-day, which falls on " boxing"
day.

But where is Horace? Will he be as sociable
as he used to be? Will he come up a prodigy
of scholarship and good-nature, half a don,
yet with a whole, and a sound heart? The
train is expected; crowds are waiting on the
platform, just as they waited this time three
years since, and--Horace is among them.

But which is Horace? It cannot be that
young gentleman with haughty looks, a de-
licately-robust or robustly-delicate figure, a
bundle of whips in his hand, and two Scotch
terriers held in with a string! It cannot be.
that white-over-coated, crushed-hatted, striped-
shirted individual! And yet it is he too. With
whom is he talking? It cannot be yes! it is,
it must be the Honourable Charley Cracker.
Where are they going? Surely Horace will
go direct home? We doubt it.

Arrived in London--a little dinner at some
West End house--beat up Sprigs, now in the
12th. Two or three fellows that the Honour-
able Charley Cracker knows--Horace must
know them. " De Lisle, of St. Agnus Dei."
"Permit me to introduce you to my friend
Sprigs, formerly of St. Walnuts De Grove
capital fellow only sent away for smashing
the college pump (this in an aside). Adjourn
to the Lyceum--farce getting slow--so on to
the Claret Cup, to hear Mr. Pope sing the
"Cross Bones" and "O, Mrs. Manning!" Get
tired, so on again to the Parthenon Saloon
--no dancing--only look on--feel seedy--
soda-water and brandy too light; pale ale,
squeamish; porter, too heavy; and so to bed
at Jarrett's Hotel. Headache--late hours in
the morning fish breakfast at Greenwich--
rather better--"may as well go home in a day
or two as now," &c., &c.

A day or two is soon gone. Horace thinks
he may as well go and "look in at the
governor;" and so he leaves the Honourable
Charley Cracker. Honourable Charley Cracker
is not a rogue or a sharper. He is merely an
ass. He is a pupil of Horace De Lisle besides,
who has taken to "coaching," and is open to
any eligible offer with which ten or seventeen
pounds a term is connected. He quits London
witli a sigh, takes out his purse with another,
and a deeper sigh.

Laura is as pretty a young mamma as you
will meet in a long summer-day's walk, and
Horace cannot help thinking so. But he
don't like babies; and baby Number One
has taken alarm at his handsomest terrier,
and is squalling energetically. Jack's old-
fashioned house, with the window-door open-
ing into a little snuggery of flowers and
vegetables, is very different to Lady De Mont-
faucon's conservatory, where he used to play
chess, smoke cigars, and sometimes read, with
his last long vacation pupil, the future Earl
of Spitalfields. At home it is much the
same. There is not so much as a bottle of
hock in the whole cellar; they will let the
cat sleep on the rug in the dining-room, and
the carriage is the same old-fashioned "tub"
as ever.

However, he gets over baby's birthday
tolerably well, although he wishes Jack didn't
know so many farmers. Besides, Jack will
nurse baby Junior himself, and will hawk out
baby Senior to shake his diminutive fists, at
new comers in general. He feels glad to get
back again to the rectory, but it is very
slow there. His father doesn't know the
Montmorencies, nor the Honourable Charley
Cracker, and wonders why he did not get the
fellowship at St. Swithin. Furthermore, Bessy
and Fanny have both got beaux, and the beaux
are not University men. Tom Harris, the
surgeon, would never do to introduce to
the Honourable Charley, although Tom has
a snug little practice, and has furnished his
house in a style that will outlast half a thou-
sand University friendships, and will make
Bessy a thoroughly good husband. Fanny's
intended is the new curate, who is not over
High Church; in fact, Horace thinks him
rather a " pump," and wonders how he can
live upon a hundred and twenty pounds a
year.

Horace owes a few odd hundred pounds;
but Standish and Co. and Stilty and Cab-
bagenet are very quiet as yet, and he will
give them a " few pounds " as soon as he
can spare it. In fact, half the bills have
not yet been sent in, for his debts are mostly
of latter-day University growth. He has
done respectably well in the school, but
nothing more. He has, however, a large
connexion, picks up pupils, and does hope to
pick up something else: indefinitely oscillat-
ing between the living of Dumdum, in the
gift of the Montmorency family (his scholar-
ship will give him a title); something under
government (he knows the Prime Minister's
aunt's second cousin); and the Woolsack. But
all his friends, who used to hear him decide
the fate of the Continent in a speech of twenty
minutes, at the Vox et prterea Nihil Associa-
tion, fill him with notions of briefs, oyster
breakfasts, and the Temple. The difficulty
is, the money. Cold-blooded as he is grown
to home associations, he has no heart to rob
Bessy and Fanny of the few hundreds their
father can give with them; still less to stint
the younger members of their just meed of
what he has himself enjoyed. But he is an
unhappy creature. He wants everything and
everybody--except the things and people
around him; he is reserved where he used to
be open, parsimonious from necessity where he
was once generous. He cannot settle to any-
thing, and the few days he has been at home
have bored him as much as the conversation
of the Honourable Charley Avould have bored
his father. Other people perceive the change,
and even he begins to have a glimpse of self-
reproach.

But, just as he is wondering why the deuce
he thought of spending Christmas at home,
a reprieve arrives in the shape of a letter
from The Honorable Charley; who, having
in an evil hour accepted an invitation to his
guardian's, finds he has nobody to smoke or
drink pale ale with, and conceives a sudden
desire for reading. The pay is liberal; and,
if it were not, getting away from home for
the remaining nine or ten days of the vaca-
tion would be a fair equivalent for any
amount of instruction likely to be imbibed
by the mental absorbents of Charley's mind.

Mrs. De Lisle cannot bear the idea of her
'' dear boy " leaving home before even the
pudding is finished, especially as Jack Har-
rington has invited the whole family to keep
Twelfth Night. Twelfth Night at Jack's!
Noisy children, country dances, perhaps snap-
dragon, and perhaps blindman's buff, with
sisters Bessy and Fanny slipping out on the
staircase, and coming in with heightened
complexions, looking as if they had been
kissed by goblins in human shape. Twelfth
Night characters, too! Perhaps draw a love
motto with Polly Bright, the old half-pay
admiral's daughter, about whom he once
liked to be teased. Never!

And so Horace goes away. His father, per-
haps, feels but little grieved; for he hopes and
thinks that his son's journey may tend to
his future advantage, and he is too sensible to
cherish that home-sickness which sometimes
prevents a man from ever making a home for
himself. But his mother cannot bear his sub-
lime disdain of all the little innocent things
that once called forth his highest approbation.
She is almost afraid Polly Bright looks thin
and anxious; and she remembers that, just
three years ago, Horace joked about his
"little wife; " and she wishes that, even by
one kind look, he had repeated the joke. It is
all one to Horace, who is gone.

To be happy, Horace, or to be really
merry? My friend, my friend, a word in
your ear! You may be quite sure that you
have grown too fast, when you find that you
have outgrown Christmas. It is a very bad
sign indeed.

THE ROUND GAME OF THE
CHRISTMAS BOWL.

[THIS Round Game, which comes, origi-
nally, from Fairy-Land, is thus played. The
Pool of the game is a capacious circular
bowl, or basin, made of ice. It is some sixty
or seventy feet in circumference, and all
round the rim there is stuck a hedge of holly-
boughs, in full berry, interspersed with
coloured lamps and silver bells. Everybody
who is inspired by Christmas festivities comes
to put into the Pool. He is to put in some-
thing which is his pride. In doing this he
generally throws in something which is
equally his trouble; and thus, by doing a
generous act at Christmas, in throwing away
his pride, he at the same time gets rid of one
of his worst troubles.]

The Rhyme.

      HERE is a Pool, all made of ice,
          For a great round Christmas Game!
      Its rim is set with green holly boughs,
         And lamps of colour'd flame;
      With silver bells that tinkle and gingle
      As each one his offering comes to mingle,--
      Whether ingot of gold, or a grey sea shingle.
Who comes first?--'Tis the King, I declare,
With the crown in his hand, and the frost in his hair
      Close to the Pool he brings his crown,
          And tosses it o'er the holly!
      So, away to the bottom goes all his pride,
          And his royal melancholy;
             While gingle! tinkle ! gingle!
                 How the sweet bells ring!
             And round about the lighted Pool
                We gambol, dance, and sing!

      Who comes next?--
         'Tis a Minister of State,
      With a Puzzle made of weights and wheels,
         And balanced on his pate!
      To the Pool of Christmas Offerings
         The Treasury Lord advances;
      Souse over, goes his Puzzle,
         And away his Lordship dances!
             While gingle! tinkle! gingle!
                How the sweet bells ring!
             And round about the lighted Pool
                We gambol, dance, and sing!

      Who comes next?
          'Tis the First Gold Stick!
      With the First Cock'd Hat!
          And the First General Brick!
      In the Pool they toss their darlings--
          Sword--hat--stick--garniture!
      And retire to the allegro
          Of the Minuet de la Cour!

      But while they caper back,
          Three Slaves-to-Dress advance,
      In splendid, killing curls and rouge,--
          The last bright thought of France!
      They say "'Tis Christmas time;
          To the Round Game we will come;
      Let us throw away our fashions,
          And--for once--'let's look at home!'"
             While gingle! tinkle! gingle!
                 How the street bells ring!
             And round about the lighted Pool
                We gambol, dance, and sing!

      But who comes now?
          'Tis the Bishop in his carriage,
      Whose shoulders bear the pain and pride
          Of Church and State's mis-marriage:
      A huge bale of lawn and purple
          He heaves into the Pool,
      And, nodding to his coachman,
          Trips off, relieved and cool!

      The Millionnaire comes next,
         With a loan to help a war,
      On the wrong side of all justice--
         And his "interest"--not so sure,
      He inflates--and he collapses--
          His mind grows sick and dim--
      Oh, the pangs of breeding money'--
          His loan flutters o'er the brim!


         With gingle! tinkle ! gingle !
             How the sweet bells ring !
          As round about the lighted Pool
            We gambol, dance, and sing!


Who is this in red and gold?
    'Tis the Soldier with his sword,
And riding on a cannon
    Bedizen'd, bless'd, adored!
Round his neck he wears a chain,
    For a show and a pretence,
But engraved with fiery letters
    Claiming blind obedience:
His pride and bane are loosed--
    They fly o'er the holly fence!

Next, a Lawyer, with his costs--
    Making full a thousand pounds,
With a score of breaking hearts,
    And live years of waste and wounds.
His face is cold and wretched--
    His life is but a span--
A red tape-worm, at the best,
    In a black coat stuff'd with bran:
He tosses o'er his bill of costs!--
    He is quite another man!
       With gingle! tinkle! gingle!
           How the street bells ring!
       And round about, the lighted Pool
           We gambol, dance, and sing!

The Merchant brings his bargain,
    Which would beggar half a town;--
The Schemer shows a "spec,"
    But deserves each good man's frown;
The Scholar brings his book,
    Where his soul, all moulting, lies;
The Poet brings his laurel
    And his castle in the skies;
The Lover brings his mistress
    Who has treated him with scorn;
The Shepherd brings his favourite lamb,
    With its curly fleece unshorn;
All these into the Pool
    Are cast, with various smarts,
As valued Christmas Offerings,
    Inspired with Christmas hearts!
       While gingle! tinkle! gingle I
           How the sweet bells ring!
       And round about the lighted Pool!
           We gambol, dance, and sing!

[The crowd of players at the Game, having
joined hands in this concluding dance, now
whirl round the Pool of Ice, gambolling and
singing; and they continue to do this, till the
charm begins to work, and the heat of the
Christmas hearts outside causes the Offering
which each has thrown in, to warm to such
a genial glow, that the heat thus collectively
generated, melts the ice. The Pool gradually
dissolves the players of the game, one after
another, sink down exhausted, and fall into a
delightful reverie,; while the melted Pool over-
flows, and floats every one of them to his
home, as he seems to lie in a mother-of-pearl
boat, with a branch of holly at the prow, and
a coloured lamp amidst the green leaves
and red berries. Each one, soon after, reco-
vers his senses just enough to find himself
lying comfortably in bed, and listening to the
waits!]
