THE HAUNTED HOUSE.

THE EXTRA CHRISTMAS NUMBER OF ALL THE YEAR ROUND.
CONDUCTED BY CHARLES DICKENS.

CONTAINING THE AMOUNT OF TWO ORDINARY NUMBERS.

CHRISTMAS, 1859.
Price 4d.

INDEX.

The Mortals in the House ........ Page   1
The Ghost in the Clock Room .....   "    8
The Ghost in the Double Room ....   "   13
The Ghost in the Picture Room ...   "   19
The Ghost in the Cupboard Room ..   "   21
The Ghost in Master B.'s Room ...   "   27
The Ghost in the Garden Room ....   "   31
The Ghost in the Corner Room ....   "   43



THE MORTALS IN THE HOUSE.

UNDER none of the accredited ghostly
circumstances, and environed by none of the
conventional ghostly surroundings, did I first make
acquaintance with the house which is the subject
of this Christmas piece. I saw it in the daylight,
with the sun upon it. There was no
wind, no rain, no lightning, no thunder, no awful
or unwonted circumstance, of any kind, to
heighten its effect. More than that: I had come
to it direct from a railway station; it was not
more than a mile distant from the railway station;
and, as I stood outside the house, looking
back upon the way I had come, I could see the
goods train running smoothly along the
embankment in the valley. I will not say that
everything was utterly common-place, because I
doubt if anything can be that, except to utterly
common-place people and there my vanity steps
in; but, I will take it on myself to say that anybody
might see the house as I saw it, any fine
autumn morning.

The manner of my lighting on it was this.

I was travelling towards London out of the
North, intending to stop by the way, to look at
the house. My health required a temporary
residence in the country; and a friend of mine
who knew that, and who had happened to drive
past the house, had written to me to suggest it as
a likely place. I had got into the train at
midnight, and had fallen asleep, and had woke up
and had sat looking out of window at the brilliant
Northern Lights in the sky, and had fallen asleep
again, and had woken up again to find the night
gone, with the usual discontented conviction on
me that I hadn't been to sleep at all;--upon
which question, in the first imbecility of that
condition, I am ashamed to believe that I would
have done wager by battle with the man who sat
opposite me. That opposite man had had,
through the night--as that opposite man always
has--several legs too many, and all of them too
long. In addition to this unreasonable conduct
(which was only to be expected of him), he had
had a pencil and a pocket-book, and had been
perpetually listening and taking notes. It had
appeared to me that these aggravating notes related
to the jolts and bumps of the carriage, and I should
have resigned myself to his taking them, under
a general supposition that he was in the civil-engineering
way of life, if he had not sat staring
straight over my head whenever he listened. He
was a goggle-eyed gentleman of a perplexed
aspect, and his demeanour became unbearable.

It was a cold, dead morning (the sun not being
up yet), and when I had out-watched the paling
light of the fires of the iron country, and the
curtain of heavy smoke that hung at once
between me and the stars and between me and
the day, I turned to my fellow-traveller and
said:

"I beg your pardon, sir, but do you observe
anything particular in me?" For, really, he
appeared to be taking down, either my travelling-cap
or my hair, with a minuteness that was a liberty.

The goggle-eyed gentleman withdrew his eyes
from behind me, as if the back of the carriage
were a hundred miles off, and said, with a lofty
look of compassion for my insignificance

"In you, sir?--B."

"B, sir?" said I, growing warm.

"I have nothing to do with you, sir," returned
the gentleman; "pray let me listen--O."

He enunciated this vowel after a pause, and
noted it down.

At first I was alarmed, for an Express lunatic
and no communication with the guard, is a serious
position. The thought came to my relief that
the gentleman might be what is popularly called
a Rapper: one of a sect for (some of) whom
I have the highest respect, but whom I don't
believe in. I was going to ask him the question,
when he took the bread out of my mouth.

"You will excuse me," said the gentleman,
contemptuously, "if I am too much in advance
of common humanity to trouble myself at all
about it. I have passed the night--as indeed I
pass the whole of my time now--in spiritual
intercourse."

"Oh!" said I, something snappishly.

"The conferences of the night began,"
continued the gentleman, turning several leaves of
his note-book, "with this message: 'Evil
communications corrupt good manners.'"

"Sound," said I; "but, absolutely new?"

"New from spirits," returned the gentleman.

I could only repeat my rather snappish "Oh!"
and ask if I might be favoured with the last
communication?

"'A bird in the hand,'" said the gentleman,
reading his last entry with great solemnity, "'is
worth two in the Bosh.'"

"Truly I am of the same opinion," said I;
"but shouldn't it be Bush?"

"It came to me, Bosh," returned the gentleman.

The gentleman then informed me that the
spirit of Socrates had delivered this special
revelation in the course of the night. "My friend,
I hope you are pretty well. There are two in
this railway carriage. How do you do? There
are seventeen thousand four hundred and seventy-nine
spirits here, but you cannot see them.
Pythagoras is here. He is not at liberty to
mention it, but hopes you like travelling."
Galileo likewise had dropped in, with this
scientific intelligence. "I am glad to see you, amico.
Coma sta? Water will freeze when it is cold
enough. Addio!" In the course of the night,
also, the following phenomena had occurred.
Bishop Butler had insisted on spelling his name,
"Bubler," for which offence against orthography
and good manners he had been dismissed as out
of temper. John Milton (suspected of wilful
mystification) had repudiated the authorship
of Paradise Lost, and had introduced
as joint authors of that poem, two Unknown
gentlemen, respectively named Grungers and
Scadgingtone. And Prince Arthur, nephew of
King John of England, had described himself as
tolerably comfortable in the seventh circle
where, he was learning to paint on velvet, under
the direction of Mrs. Trimmer and Mary Queen
of Scots.

If this should meet the eye of the gentleman
who favoured me with these disclosures, I trust
he will excuse my confessing that the sight of
the rising sun, and the contemplation of the
magnificent Order of the vast Universe, made
me impatient of them. In a word, I was so
impatient of them, that I was mightily glad to get
out at the next station, and to exchange
these clouds and vapours for the free air of
Heaven.

By that time it was a beautiful morning. As
I walked away among such leaves as had already
fallen from the golden, brown, and russet trees;
and as I looked around me on the wonders of
Creation, and thought of the steady, unchanging,
and harmonious laws by which they are
sustained; the gentleman's spiritual intercourse
seemed to me as poor a piece of journey-work as
ever this world saw. In which heathen state of
mind, I came within view of the house, and
stopped to examine it attentively.

It was a solitary house, standing in a sadly
neglected garden: a pretty even square of some
two acres. It was a house of about the time of
George the Second; as stiff, as cold, as formal,
and in as bad taste, as could possibly be desired
by the most loyal admirer of the whole quartett
of Georges. It was uninhabited, but had, within
a year or two, been cheaply repaired to render
it habitable; I say cheaply, because the work
had been done in a surface manner, and was
already decaying as to the paint and plaster,
though the colours were fresh. A lop-sided
board drooped over the garden wall, announcing
that it was "to let on very reasonable terms, well
furnished." It was much too closely and heavily
shadowed by trees, and, in particular, there
were six tall poplars before the front windows,
which were excessively melancholy, and the site
of which had been extremely ill chosen.

It was easy to see that it was an avoided
house--a house that was shunned by the village,
to which my eye was guided by a church spire
some half a mile off--a house that nobody would
take. And the natural inference was, that it
had the reputation of being a haunted house.

No period within the four-and-twenty hours
of day and night, is so solemn to me, as the
early morning. In the summer time, I often
rise very early, and repair to my room to
do a day's work before breakfast, and I am
always on those occasions deeply impressed by
the stillness and solitude around me. Besides
that there is something awful in the being
surrounded by familiar faces asleep--in the
knowledge that those who are dearest to us and to
whom we are dearest, are profoundly
unconscious of us, in an impassive state anticipative of
that mysterious condition to which we are all
tending--the stopped life, the broken threads
of yesterday, the deserted seat, the closed book,
the unfinished but abandoned occupation, all
are images of Death. The tranquillity of
the hour is the tranquillity of Death. The
colour and the chill have the same association.
Even a certain air that familiar household
objects take upon them when they first
emerge from the shadows of the night into
the morning, of being newer, and as they
used to be long ago, has its counterpart in the
subsidence of the worn face of maturity or age,
in death, into the old youthful look. Moreover,
I once saw the apparition of my father, at this
hour. He was alive and well, and nothing ever
came of it, but I saw him in the daylight, sitting
with his back towards me, on a seat that stood
beside my bed. His head was resting on his hand,
and whether he was slumbering or grieving, I
could not discern. Amazed to see him there, I
sat up, moved my position, leaned out of bed, and
watched him. As he did not move, I spoke to
him more than once. As he did not move then,
I became alarmed and laid my hand upon his
shoulder, as I thought--and there was no such
thing.

For all these reasons, and for others less
easily and briefly statable, I find the early
morning to be my most ghostly time. Any
house would be more or less haunted, to me, in
the early morning; and a haunted house could
scarcely address me to greater advantage than
then.

I walked on into the village, with the desertion
of this house upon my mind, and I found the
landlord of the little inn, sanding his door-step.
I bespoke breakfast, and broached the subject
of the house.

"Is it haunted?" I asked.

The landlord looked at me, shook his head,
and answered, "I say nothing."

"Then it is haunted?"

"Well!" cried the landlord, in an outburst of
frankness that had the appearance of desperation--
"I wouldn't sleep in it."

"Why not?"

"If I wanted to have all the bells in a house
ring, with nobody to ring 'em; and all the doors
in a house bang with nobody to bang 'em; and all
sorts of feet treading about with no feet there;
why then," said the landlord, "I'd sleep in that
house."

"Is anything seen there?"

The landlord looked at me again, and then,
with his former appearance of desperation,
called down his stable-yard for "Ikey!"

The call produced a high-shouldered young
fellow, with a round red face, a short crop of
sandy hair, a very broad humorous mouth, a
turned-up nose, and a great sleeved waistcoat of
purple bars with mother-of-pearl buttons, that
seemed to be growing upon him, and to be in a
fair way--if it were not pruned--of covering his
head and overrunning his boots.

"This gentleman wants to know," said the
landlord, "if anything' s seen at the Poplars."

"'Ooded woman with a howl," said Ikey, in
a state of great freshness.

"Do you mean a cry?"

"I mean a bird, sir."

"A hooded woman with an owl. Dear me!
Did you ever see her?"

"I seen the howl."

"Never the woman?"

"Not so plain as the howl, but they always
keeps together."

"Has anybody ever seen the woman as plainly
as the owl?"

"Lord bless you, sir! Lots."

"Who?"

"Lord bless you, sir! Lots."

"The general-dealer opposite, for instance,
who is opening his shop?"

"Perkins? Bless you, Perkins wouldn't go
a-nigh the place. No!" observed the young
man, with considerable feeling; "he an't overwise,
an't Perkins, but he an't such a fool as that."

(Here, the landlord murmured his confidence
in Perkins's knowing better.)

"Who is--or who was--the hooded woman
with the owl? Do you know?"

"Well!" said Ikey, holding up his cap with
one hand while he scratched his head with the
other, "they say, in general, that she was
murdered, and the howl he 'ooted the while."

This very concise summary of the facts was
all I could learn, except that a young man, as
hearty and likely a young man as ever I see,
had been took with fits and held down in
'em, after seeing the hooded woman. Also, that
a personage dimly described as "a hold chap, a
sort of a one-eyed tramp, answering to the name
of Joby, unless you challenged him as Greenwood,
and then he said, 'Why not? and even if so, mind
your own business,'" had encountered the hooded
woman, a matter of five or six times. But, I was
not materially assisted by these witnesses:
inasmuch as the first was in California, and the last
was, as Ikey said (and he was confirmed by the
landlord) Anywheres.

Now, although I regard with a hushed and
solemn fear, the mysteries, between which and
this state of existence is interposed the barrier
of the great trial and change that fall on all the
things that live; and although I have not the
audacity to pretend that I know anything of
them; I can no more reconcile the mere banging
of doors, ringing of bells, creaking of boards, and
such-like insignificances, with the majestic beauty
and pervading analogy of all the Divine rules that
I am permitted to understand, than I had been
able, a little while before, to yoke the spiritual
intercourse of my fellow-traveller to the chariot of
the rising sun. Moreover, I had lived in two
haunted houses--both abroad. In one of these,
an old Italian palace, which bore the reputation
of being very badly haunted indeed, and
which had recently been twice abandoned on
that account, I lived eight months, most
tranquilly and pleasantly: notwithstanding that
the house had a score of mysterious bedrooms,
which were never used, and possessed, in
one large room in which I sat reading, times out
of number at all hours, and next to which I
slept, a haunted chamber of the first pretensions.
I gently hinted these considerations to the landlord.
And as to this particular house having a
bad name, I reasoned with him, Why, how many
things had bad names undeservedly, and how
easy it was to give bad names, and did he not
think that if he and I were persistently to
whisper in the village that any weird-looking old
drunken tinker of the neighbourhood had sold
himself to the Devil, he would come in time to
be suspected of that commercial venture! All
this wise talk was perfectly ineffective with the
landlord, I am bound to confess, and was as dead
a failure as ever I made in my life.

To cut this part of the story short, I was
piqued about the haunted house, and was already
half resolved to take it. So, after breakfast, I got
the keys from Perkins's brother-in-law (a whip
and harness-maker, who keeps the Post Office,
and is under submission to a most rigorous wife
of the Doubly Seceding Little Emmanuel persuasion),
and went up to the house, attended by my
landlord and by Ikey.

Within, I found it, as I had expected,
transcendantly dismal. The slowly changing
shadows waved on it from the heavy trees, were
doleful in the last degree; the house was ill-placed,
ill-built, ill-planned, and ill-fitted. It
was damp, it was not free from dry rot, there
was a flavour of rats in it, and it was the gloomy
victim of that indescribable decay which settles
on all the work of man's hands whenever it is
not turned to man's account. The kitchens and
offices were too large, and too remote from each
other. Above stairs and below, waste tracks of
passage intervened between patches of fertility
represented by rooms; and there was a mouldy
old well with a green growth upon it, hiding,
like a murderous trap, near the bottom of the
back-stairs, under the double row of bells.
One of these bells was labelled, on a black
ground in faded white letters, MASTER B.
This, they told me, was the bell that rang the
most.

"Who was Master B.?" I asked. "Is it
known what he did while the owl hooted?"

"Rang the bell," said Ikey.

I was rather struck by the prompt dexterity
with which this young man pitched his fur
cap at the bell, and rang it himself. It was a
loud, unpleasant bell, and made a very
disagreeable sound. The other bells were inscribed
according to the names of the rooms to which
their wires were conducted: as "Picture
Room," "Double Room," "Clock Room," and
the like. Following Master B.'s bell to its
source, I found that young gentleman to have
had but indifferent third-class accommodation in
a triangular cabin under the cock-loft, with a
corner fireplace which Master B. must have
been exceedingly small if he were ever able to
warm himself at, and a corner chimney-piece like a
pyramidal staircase to the ceiling for Tom Thumb.
The papering of one side of the room had dropped
down bodily, with fragments of plaster adhering
to it, and almost blocked up the door. It
appeared that Master B. in his spiritual condition,
always made a point of pulling the paper
down. Neither the landlord nor Ikey could
suggest why he made such a fool of himself.

Except that the house had an immensely large
rambling loft at top, I made no other discoveries.
It was moderately well furnished, but sparely.
Some of the furniture--say, a third--was as old
as the house; the rest, was of various periods
within the last half century. I was referred to
a corn-chandler in the market-place of the
county-town to treat for the house. I went
that day, and I took it for six months.

It was just the middle of October when I
moved in with my maiden sister (I venture to
call her eight-and-thirty, she is so very handsome,
sensible, and engaging). We took with
us, a deaf stable-man, my bloodhound Turk, two
woman servants, and a young person called an
Odd Girl. I have reason to record of the attendant
last enumerated, who was one of the Saint
Lawrence's Union Female Orphans, that she
was a fatal mistake and a disastrous engagement.

The year was dying early, the leaves were
falling fast, it was a raw cold day when we
took possession, and the gloom of the house
was most depressing. The cook (an amiable
woman, but of a weak turn of intellect) burst into
tears on beholding the kitchen, and requested
that her silver watch might be delivered over to
her sister (2, Tuppintock's Gardens, Liggs's
Walk, Clapham Rise), in the event of anything
happening to her from the damp. Streaker, the
housemaid, feigned cheerfulness, but was the
greater martyr. The Odd Girl, who had never
been in the country, alone was pleased, and
made arrangements for sowing an acorn in the
garden outside the scullery window, and rearing
an oak.

We went, before dark, through all the natural--
as opposed to supernatural--miseries
incidental to our state. Dispiriting reports
ascended (like the smoke) from the basement in
volumes, and descended from the upper rooms.
There was no rolling-pin, there was no salamander
(which failed to surprise me, for I don't know
what it is), there was nothing in the house, what
there was, was broken, the last people must
have lived like pigs, what could the meaning of
the landlord be? Through these distresses, the
Odd Girl was cheerful and exemplary. But,
within four hours after dark we had got into a
supernatural groove, and the Odd Girl had seen
"Eyes," and was in hysterics.

My sister and I had agreed to keep the haunting
strictly to ourselves, and my impression was,
and still is, that I had not left Ikey, when he
helped to unload the cart, alone with the
women, or any one of them, for one minute.
Nevertheless, as I say, the Odd Girl had "seen
Eyes" (no other explanation could ever be
drawn from her), before nine, and by ten o'clock
had had as much vinegar applied to her as would
pickle a handsome salmon.

I leave a discerning public to judge of my
feelings, when, under these untoward circumstances,
at about half-past ten o'clock Master
B.'s bell began to ring in a most infuriated manner,
and Turk howled until the house resounded
with his lamentations!

I hope I may never again be in a state of
mind so unchristian as the mental frame in
which I lived for some weeks, respecting the
memory of Master B. Whether his bell was rung
by rats, or mice, or bats, or wind, or what other
accidental vibration, or sometimes by one cause,
sometimes another, and sometimes by collusion,
I don't know; but, certain it is, that it did ring,
two nights out of three, until I conceived the
happy idea of twisting Master B.'s neck--in
other words, breaking his bell short off--and
silencing that young gentleman, as to my
experience and belief, for ever.

But, by that time, the Odd Girl had
developed such improving powers of catalepsy,
that she had become a shining example of that
very inconvenient disorder. She would stiffen,
like a Guy Fawkes endowed with unreason, on
the most irrelevant occasions. I would address
the servants in a lucid manner, pointing out to
them that I had painted Master B.'s room and
balked the paper, and taken Master B.'s bell
away and balked the ringing, and if they could
suppose that that confounded boy had lived
and died, to clothe himself with no better
behaviour than would most unquestionably have
brought him and the sharpest particles of a birch-broom
into close acquaintance in the present
imperfect state of existence, could they also suppose
a mere poor human being, such as I was, capable
by those contemptible means of counteracting
and limiting the powers of the disembodied
spirits of the dead, or of any spirits?--I say I
would become emphatic and cogent, not to say
rather complacent, in such an address, when it
would all go for nothing by reason of the Odd
Girl's suddenly stiffening from the toes upward,
and glaring among us like a parochial
petrifaction.

Streaker, the housemaid, too, had an attribute
of a most discomfiting nature. I am unable to
say whether she was of an unusually lymphatic
temperament, or what else was the matter with
her, but this young woman became a mere
Distillery for the production of the largest and
most transparent tears I ever met with.
Combined with these characteristics, was a peculiar
tenacity of hold in those specimens, so that they
didn't fall, but hung upon her face and nose.
In this condition, and mildly and deploringly
shaking her head, her silence would throw me
more heavily than the Admirable Crichton could
have done in a verbal disputation for a purse of
money. Cook, likewise, always covered me
with confusion as with a garment, by neatly
winding up the session with the protest that
the Ouse was wearing her out, and by meekly
repeating her last wishes regarding her silver
watch.

As to our nightly life; the contagion of suspicion
and fear was among us, and there is no
such contagion under the sky. Hooded woman?
According to the accounts, we were in a perfect
Convent of hooded women. Noises? With
that contagion down stairs, I myself have sat in
the dismal parlour, listening, until I have heard
so many and such strange noises, that they
would have chilled my blood if I had not warmed
it by dashing out to make discoveries. Try
this in bed, in the dead of the night; try this at
your own comfortable fireside, in the life of the
night. You can fill any house with noises, if
you will, until you have a noise for every nerve
in your nervous system.

I repeat; the contagion of suspicion and fear
was among us, and there is no such contagion
under the sky. The women (their noses in a
chronic state of excoriation from smelling-salts),
were always primed and loaded for a swoon, and
ready to go off with hair-triggers. The two
elder detached the Odd Girl on all expeditions
that were considered doubly hazardous,
and she always established the reputation of
such adventures by coming back cataleptic. If
Cook or Streaker went overhead after dark, we
knew we should presently hear a bump on the
ceiling; and this took place so constantly, that
it was as if a fighting man were engaged to go
about the house, administering a touch of his art
which I believe is called The Auctioneer, to every
domestic he met with.

It was in vain to do anything. It was in vain
to be frightened, for the moment in one's own
person, by a real owl, and then to show the owl. It
was in vain to discover, by striking an accidental
discord on the piano, that Turk always howled
at particular notes and combinations. It was
in vain to be a Rhadamanthus with the bells,
and if an unfortunate bell rang without leave,
to have it down inexorably and silence it. It was
in vain to fire up chimneys, let torches down the
well, charge furiously into suspected rooms and
recesses. We changed servants, and it was no
better. The new set ran away, and a third set
came, and it was no better. At last, our
comfortable housekeeping got to be so disorganised
and wretched, that I one night dejectedly said
to my sister: "Patty, I begin to despair of
our getting people to go on with us here, and I
think we must give this up."

My sister, who is a woman of immense spirit,
replied. "No, John, don't give it up. Don't be
beaten, John. There is another way."

"And what is that?" said I.

"John," returned my sister, "if we are not
to be driven out of this house, and that for no
reason whatever, that is apparent to you or
me, we must help ourselves and take the house
wholly and solely into our own hands."

"But, the servants," said I.

"Have no servants," said my sister, boldly.

Like most people in my grade of life, I had
never thought of the possibility of going on
without those faithful obstructions. The
notion was so new to me when suggested, that
I looked very doubtful.

"We know they come here to be frightened
and infect one another, and we know they are
frightened and do infect one another," said my
sister.

"With the exception of Bottles," I observed,
in a meditative tone.

(The deaf stableman. I kept him in my
service, and still keep him, as a phenomenon of
moroseness not to be matched in England.)

"To be sure, John," assented my sister;
"except Bottles. And what does that go to prove?
Bottles talks to nobody, and hears nobody unless
he is absolutely roared at, and what alarm has
Bottles ever given, or taken! None."

This was perfectly true; the individual in
question having retired, every night at ten o'clock,
to his bed over the coach-house, with no other
company than a pitchfork and a pail of water. That
the pail of water would have been over me, and the
pitchfork through me, if I had put myself without
announcement in Bottles's way after that minute,
I had deposited in my own mind as a fact worth
remembering. Neither had Bottles ever taken
the least notice of any of our many uproars. An
imperturbable and speechless man, he had sat at
his supper, with Streaker present in a swoon,
and the Odd Girl marble, and had only put
another potato in his cheek, or profited by the
general misery to help himself to beefsteak pie.

"And so," continued my sister, "I exempt
Bottles. And considering, John, that the house
is too large, and perhaps too lonely, to be kept
well in hand by Bottles, you, and me, I propose
that we cast about among our friends for a
certain selected number of the most reliable
and willing--form a Society here for three
months--wait upon ourselves and one another
--live cheerfully and socially--and see what
happens."

I was so charmed with my sister, that I
embraced her on the spot, and went into her plan
with the greatest ardour.

We were then in the third week of November;
but, we took our measures so vigorously, and
were so well seconded by the friends in whom
we confided, that there was still a week of the
month unexpired, when our party all came down
together merrily, and mustered in the haunted
house.

I will mention, in this place, two small
changes that I made while my sister and I
were yet alone. It occurring to me as not
improbable that Turk howled in the house at
night, partly because he wanted to get out of
it, I stationed him in his kennel outside, but
unchained; and I seriously warned the village that
any man who came in his way must not expect
to leave him without a rip in his own throat. I
then casually asked Ikey if he were a judge of a
gun? On his saying, "Yes, sir, I knows a good
gun when I sees her," I begged the favour of
his stepping up to the house and looking at
mine.

"She's a true one, sir," said Ikey, after
inspecting a double-barreled rifle that I bought in
New York a few years ago. "No mistake about
her, sir."

"Ikey," said I, "don't mention it; I have
seen something in this house."

"No sir?" he whispered, greedily opening
his eyes. "'Ooded lady, sir?"

"Don't be frightened," said I. "It was a
figure rather like you."

"Lord, sir?"

"Ikey!" said I, shaking hands with him
warmly: I may say affectionately; "if there is
any truth in these ghost-stories, the greatest
service I can do you, is, to fire at that figure.
And I promise you, by Heaven and earth, I will
do it with this gun if I see it again!"

The young man thanked me, and took his
leave with some little precipitation, after declining
a glass of liquor. I imparted my secret
to him, because I had never quite forgotten his
throwing his cap at the bell; because I had, on
another occasion, noticed something very like a
fur cap, lying not far from the bell, one night
when it had burst out ringing; and because I
had remarked that we were at our ghostliest
whenever he came up in the evening to comfort
the servants. Let me do Ikey no injustice. He
was afraid of the house, and believed in its being
haunted; and yet he would play false on the
haunting side, so surely as he got an opportunity.
The Odd Girl's case was exactly similar.
She went about the house in a state of real
terror, and yet lied monstrously and wilfully,
and invented many of the alarms she spread, and
made many of the sounds we heard. I had had my
eye on the two, and I know it. It is not necessary
for me, here, to account for this preposterous
state of mind; I content myself with remarking
that it is familiarly known to every intelligent
man who has had fair medical, legal, or other
watchful experience; that it is as well
established and as common a state of mind as
any with which observers are acquainted; and
that it is one of the first elements, above all
others, rationally to be suspected in, and strictly
looked for, and separated from, any question of
this kind.

To return to our party. The first thing we
did when we were all assembled, was, to draw
lots for bedrooms. That done, and every
bedroom, and, indeed, the whole house, having been
minutely examined by the whole body, we
allotted the various household duties, as if we
had been on a gipsy party, or a yachting
party, or a hunting party, or were ship-wrecked.
I then recounted the floating
rumours concerning the hooded lady, the owl,
and Master B.: with others, still more filmy,
which had floated about during our occupation,
relative to some ridiculous old ghost of the
female gender who went up and down, carrying
the ghost of a round table; and also to an
impalpable Jackass, whom nobody was ever able
to catch. Some of these ideas I really believe
our people below had communicated to one
another in some diseased way, without conveying
them in words. We then gravely called one
another to witness, that we were not there to
be deceived, or to deceive--which we
considered pretty much the same thing--and that,
with a serious sense of responsibility, we would
be strictly true to one another, and would
strictly follow out the truth. The understanding
was established, that any one who heard
unusual noises in the night, and who wished to trace
them, should knock at my door; lastly, that on
Twelfth Night, the last night of holy Christmas,
all our individual experiences since that then
present hour of our coming together in the
haunted house, should be brought to light for
the good of all; and that we would hold our
peace on the subject till then, unless on some
remarkable provocation to break silence.

We were, in number and in character, as
follows:

First--to get my sister and myself out of the
way--there were we two. In the drawing of
lots, my sister drew her own room, and I drew
Master B.'s. Next, there was our first cousin
John Herschel, so called after the great astronomer:
than whom I suppose a better man at a
telescope does not breathe. With him, was his
wife: a charming creature to whom he had been
married in the previous spring. I thought it
(under the circumstances) rather imprudent to
bring her, because there is no knowing what
even a false alarm may do at such a time; but
I suppose he knew his own business best, and I
must say that if she had been my wife, I never
could have left her endearing and bright face
behind. They drew the Clock Room. Alfred
Starling, an uncommonly agreeable young fellow
of eight-and-twenty for whom I have the greatest
liking, was in the Double Room: mine, usually,
and designated by that name from having a
dressing-room within it, with two large and
cumbersome windows, which no wedges I was
ever able to make, would keep from shaking, in
any weather, wind or no wind. Alfred is a
young fellow who pretends to be "fast" (another
word for loose, as I understand the term), but
who is much too good and sensible for that
nonsense, and who would have distinguished himself
before now, if his father had not unfortunately
left him a small independence of two hundred a
year, on the strength of which his only occupation
in life has been to spend six. I am in hopes,
however, that his Banker may break, or that he
may enter into some speculation, guaranteed to
pay twenty per cent; for, I am convinced that
if he could only be ruined, his fortune is made.
Belinda Bates, bosom friend of my sister, and a
most intellectual, amiable, and delightful girl,
got the Picture Room. She has a fine genius
for poetry, combined with real business
earnestness, and "goes in"--to use an expression
of Alfred's--for Woman's mission, Woman's
rights, Woman's wrongs, and everything that is
Woman's with a capital W, or is not and ought
to be, or is and ought not to be. "Most praise-worthy,
my dear, and Heaven prosper you !" I
whispered to her on the first night of my taking
leave of her at the Picture Room door, "but
don't overdo it. And in respect of the great
necessity there is, my darling, for more employments
being within the reach of Woman than our
civilisation has as yet assigned to her, don't fly
at the unfortunate men, even those men who are
at first sight in your way, as if they were the
natural oppressors of your sex; for, trust me,
Belinda, they do sometimes spend their wages
among wives and daughters, sisters, mothers,
aunts, and grandmothers; and the play is, really,
not all Wolf and Red Riding-Hood, but has
other parts in it." However, I digress.

Belinda, as I have mentioned, occupied the
Picture Room, We had but three other chambers:
the Corner Room, the Cupboard Room,
and the Garden Room. My old friend, Jack
Governor, "slung his hammock," as he called it,
in the Corner Room. I have always regarded
Jack as the finest-looking sailor that ever sailed.
He is grey now, but as handsome as he was a
quarter of a century ago--nay, handsomer. A
portly, cheery, well-built figure of a broad-shouldered
man, with a frank smile, a brilliant
dark eye, and a rich dark eyebrow. I remember
those under darker hair, and they look all the
better for their silver setting. He has been
wherever his Union namesake flies, has Jack,
and I have met old shipmates of his, away in
the Mediterranean and on the other side of the
Atlantic, who have beamed and brightened at
the casual mention of his name, and have
cried, "You know Jack Governor? Then you
know a prince of men!" That he is! And so
unmistakably a naval officer, that if you were to
meet him coming out of an Esquimaux snow-hut
in seal's skin, you would be vaguely persuaded
he was in full naval uniform.

Jack once had that bright clear eye of his on
my sister; but, it fell out that he married
another lady and took her to South America,
where she died. This was a dozen years ago or
more. He brought down with him to our haunted
house a little cask of salt beef; for, he is always
convinced that all salt beef not of his own pickling,
is mere carrion, and invariably, when he goes to
London, packs a piece in his portmanteau. He
had also volunteered to bring with him one
"Nat Beaver," an old comrade of his, captain
of a merchantman. Mr. Beaver, with a thick-set
wooden face and figure, and apparently as hard
as a block all over, proved to be an intelligent
man, with a world of watery experiences in him,
and great practical knowledge. At times, there
was a curious nervousness about him, apparently
the lingering result of some old illness; but, it
seldom lasted many minutes. He got the
Cupboard Room, and lay there next to Mr. Undery,
my friend and solicitor: who came down, in an
amateur capacity, "to go through with it," as
he said, and who plays whist better than the
whole Law List, from the red cover at the
beginning to the red cover at the end.

I never was happier in my life, and I believe
it was the universal feeling among us. Jack
Governor, always a man of wonderful resources,
was Chief Cook, and made some of the best
dishes I ever ate, including unapproachable
curries. My sister was pastrycook and
confectioner. Starling and I were Cook's Mate,
turn and turn about, and on special occasions
the chief cook "pressed" Mr. Beaver. We had
a great deal of out-door sport and exercise, but
nothing was neglected within, and there was no ill
humour or misunderstanding among us, and our
evenings were so delightful that we had at least
one good reason for being reluctant to go to bed.

We had a few night alarms in the beginning.
On the first night, I was knocked up by Jack
with a most wonderful ship's lantern in his
hand, like the gills of some monster of the deep,
who informed me that he was "going aloft to
the main truck," to have the weathercock down.
It was a stormy night and I remonstrated; but
Jack called my attention to its making a sound
like a cry of despair, and said somebody would
be "hailing a ghost" presently, if it wasn't done.
So, up to the top of the house, where I could
hardly stand for the wind, we went, accompanied
by Mr. Beaver; and there Jack, lantern and all
with Mr. Beaver after him, swarmed up to
the top of a cupola, some two dozen feet above
the chimneys, and stood upon nothing
particular, coolly knocking the weathercock off,
until they both got into such good spirits with
the wind and the height, that I thought they
would never come down. Another night, they
turned out again, and had a chimney-cowl off.
Another night, they cut a sobbing and gulping
water-pipe away. Another night, they found out
something else. On several occasions, they both,
in the coolest manner, simultaneously dropped
out of their respective bedroom windows, hand
over hand by their counterpanes, to "overhaul"
something mysterious in the garden.

The engagement among us was faithfully
kept, and nobody revealed anything. All we
knew, was, if any one's room were haunted, no
one looked the worse for it. Christmas came,
and we had noble Christmas fare ("all hands"
had been pressed for the pudding), and Twelfth
Night came, and our store of mincemeat was
ample to hold out to the last day of our
time, and our cake was quite a glorious sight.
It was then, as we all sat round the table and
the fire, that I recited the terms of our compact,
and called, first, for


THE GHOST IN THE CLOCK ROOM

My cousin, John Herschel, turned rather red, and
turned rather white, and said he could not deny
that his room had been haunted. The Spirit of a
woman had pervaded it. On being asked by several
voices whether the Spirit had taken any terrible
or ugly shape, my cousin drew his wife's arm
through his own, and said decidedly, "No." To the
question, had his wife been aware of the Spirit?
he answered, "Yes." Had it spoken? "Oh clear,
yes!" As to the question, "What did it say?" he
replied apologetically, that he could have wished
his wife would have undertaken the answer, for she
would have executed it much better than he.
However, she had made him promise to be the
mouthpiece of the Spirit, and was very anxious
that he should withhold nothing; so, he would do
his best, subject to her correction. "Suppose the
Spirit," added my cousin, as he finally prepared
himself for beginning, "to be my wife here,
sitting among us:"

I was an orphan from my infancy, with six
elder half-sisters. A long and persistent course
of training imposed upon me the yoke of a
second and diverse nature, and I grew up as
much the child of my eldest sister, Barbara, as
I was the daughter of my deceased parents.

Barbara, in all her private plans, as in all
her domestic decrees, inexorably decided that
her sisters must be married; and, so powerful
had been her single but inflexible will, that
each of them had been advantageously settled,
excepting myself, upon whom she built her highest
hopes.

Most people know a character such as I had
grown--a mindless, flirting girl, whose
acknowledged vocation was the hunting and catching
of an eligible match; rather pretty, lively,
and just sentimental enough to make me a very
pleasant companion for an idle hour or two, as I
exacted and enjoyed the slight attentions an
unemployed man is pleased to offer. There was
scarcely a young man in the neighbourhood with
whom I had not coquetted. I had served my
seven years' apprenticeship to my profession,
and had passed my twenty-fifth birthday without
having achieved my purpose, when Barbara's
patience was wearied, and she spoke to me with
a decision and explicitness we had always
avoided; for, on some subjects, it is better to
have a silent understanding than an expressed
opinion.

"Stella," she said, solemnly, "you are now
five-and-twenty, and every one of your sisters
were in homes of their own before they were
your age; yet none of them had your
advantages or your talents. But I must tell you
frankly your chances are on the wane, and, unless
you exert yourself, our plans must fail. I have
observed an error into which you have fallen,
and which I have not mentioned before.
Besides your very open and indiscriminate flirtations
which young men regard only as an amusing
pastime you have a way with you of rallying
and laughing at any one who begins to look
really serious. Now your opportunity rests upon
the moment when they begin to be earnest in
their manner. Then you should seem confused
and silenced; you ought to lose your vivacity,
and half avoid them; seeming almost frightened
and quite bewildered by the change. A little
melancholy goes a deal further than the utmost
cheerfulness; for, if a man believes you can live
without him, he will not, give you a second
thought. I could name half a dozen most
eligible settlements you have lost by laughing
at the wrong minute. Mortify a man's self-love,
Stella, and you can never heal the
wound."

I paused for a minute or two before I
answered; for the original suppressed nature that I
had inherited from my unknown mother, was
stirring unwonted feeling in my heart.

"Barbara," I answered, with timidity,
"among all the people I have known, I never
saw one whom I could reverence, and look up
to; nor, I am half ashamed to use the word,
whom I could love."

"I do not wonder you are ashamed," said
Barbara, severely. "At your age, you cannot
expect to fall in love like a girl of seventeen.
But I tell you, definitely and distinctly, it is
necessary that you should marry; and we had
better work in concert now. So, if you will
decide upon any one, I will give you every
assistance in my power, and, if you will only
concentrate your wishes and abilities, you
cannot fail. Propinquity is all you require, if you
once make up your mind."

"I do not like any one I know," I replied,
moodily; "and I have no chance with those
who have known me; so I decide upon besieging
Martin Fraser."

Barbara received this announcement with a
snort of derisive anger.

The neighbourhood in which we lived was a
populous iron district, where, though there were
few families of ancient birth or high standing,
there were many of our own station, forming a
pleasant, hospitable, social class. Our
residences were commodious modern houses, built
at convenient distances from each other. Some
of these, including our own, were the property
of an infirm old man, who dwelt in his family
mansion, the last of the many gabled, half-timbered,
Elizabethan houses which had stood
upon the undiscovered iron and coal fields.
The last relics of the rural aristocracy of the
district, Mr. Fraser and his son led a strictly
recluse life, avoiding all communication with
their neighbours, whose gaiety and hospitality
they could not reciprocate. No one intruded
upon their privacy, excepting for the most
necessary business transactions. The elder man
was almost bedridden, and the younger was said
to be entirely absorbed in scientific pursuits.
No wonder that Barbara laughed; but her
ridicule only excited and confirmed my determination;
and the very difficulty of the enterprise
gave it the interest that all my other efforts had
lacked. I argued obstinately with Barbara till
I won her consent.

"You must write to old Mr. Fraser," I said.
"Do not mention the young one, and say your
youngest sister is studying astronomy, and, as he
possesses the only telescope in the country, you
will be greatly indebted to him if he would let
her see it."

"There is one thing in your favour," Barbara
remarked, as she sat down to write; "the old
gentleman was once engaged to your mother."

Oh! I am humbled to think how shrewdly we
managed our business, and extorted a kind
invitation from Mr. Fraser to the "daughter of his
old friend, Maria Horley."

It was an evening in February when,
accompanied only by an old servant--for Barbara was
not included in the invitation--I first crossed the
threshold of Martin Fraser's home.

An air of profound peace pervaded the
dwelling. I entered it with a vague, uneasy
consciousness of unfitness and treachery. My
attendant remained in the entrance-hall, and, as
I was conducted to the library, a feeling of
shyness stole over me, which was prompting me to
retreat; but, with the recollection that I was
becomingly dressed, I regained my confidence,
and advanced smilingly into the room. It was
a low, oaken-panelled room, sombre, with
massive antique furniture that threw deep and
curious shadows around, in the flickering light
of a fire, by which stood, instead of the recluse,
Martin Fraser whom I expected to meet, a
quaint, little child, dressed in the garb of a
woman, and with a woman's self-possession and
ease of manner.

"I am very glad to see you. You are
welcome," she said, advancing to meet me, and
extending her hand to lead me to a seat. She
clasped my hand with a firm and peculiar grasp;
a clasp of guidance and assistance, quite unlike
the ordinary timidity or inertness of a child's
manner, and, placing me in a chair before the
fire, she seated herself nearly opposite me.

I made a few embarrassed remarks, to which
she replied, and then I noticed her furtively
and in silence. A huge black retriever lay
motionless at her feet, which rested upon
him, covered with the folds of the long robe-like
dress she wore. There was an expression
of placidity, slightly pensive, upon her tiny
features, heightened by a peculiar habit of
closing the eyes, which is rarely seen in
children, and always gives them a statuesque
appearance. It seemed as though she had
withdrawn herself into a solitary self-communing,
of which there could be no expression
either by words or looks. I grew afraid of the
silent, weird-like creature, sitting without apparent
breath or motion in the dancing fire-light,
and I was glad when the door opened, and the
object of my pursuit entered. I looked at him
inquisitively, for I had recovered from my sense
of treachery, and it amused me to think how
unconscious he was of our definite plans
concerning him. Hitherto the young men I had
met had a fear of being caught, greater than
my desire to catch them, so our contest
had been an open and equal one; but Martin
Fraser knew nothing of the wiles of woman. I
remembered that my brown hair fell in curls
round my face, and that my dark blue eyes
were considered expressive, when I looked up
to meet his gaze; but when he accosted me
with an air of grave preoccupation and of
courteous indifference that would not permit
him to notice my personal charms, I trembled
to think that all I knew of astronomy was what
I had learned at school in Mangnall's Questions.

The grave, austere man said at once:

"My father, Mr. Fraser, is altogether
confined to his own rooms, but he desires the
favour of a visit from you. Upon me devolves
the honour of showing you what you require to
view through the telescope, and, while I adjust
it, will you oblige him by conversing with him for a
few minutes? Lucy Fraser will accompany you."

The child rose, and, taking my hand again in
her firm hold, led me to the old man's sitting-room.

"You are like your mother, child," he said,
after looking at me long; "you have her face
and eyes; not a whit like your sister Barbara.
How did you come by your out-of-the-way name,
Stella?"

"My father named me after a favourite
racer," I answered, for the first time giving the
simple derivation of my name.

"Just like him," laughed the old man; "I
remember the horse well. I knew your father
as well as I do my son Martin. You have seen
my son, young lady? Yes, I thought so; and
this is my granddaughter, Lucy Fraser, the
last chip of the old block; for my son is not a
marrying man, and we have adopted her as our
heir, and she is always to keep her name, and
be the founder of another line of Frasers.

The child stood with pensive, downcast eyes,
as though already bowed down by her weight
of cares and responsibilities; the old man
chatted on, till the deep tones of an organ
resounded through the house.

"My uncle is ready for us," she said to me.

We paused at the library door, for I laid my
hand restrainingly on Lucy Fraser's shoulder,
and stood listening to the wonderful music the
organ poured forth. It was such as I had never
heard before; roaring and swelling like the
ceaseless surging of the sea; and, here and there,
a single wailing note which seemed to pierce
me with an inexpressible pain. When it had ended,
I stood before Martin Fraser silent and subdued.

The telescope had been carried out to the end
of the terrace, where the house could not
intercept our view; and thither Lucy Fraser and I
followed the astronomer. We stood upon the
highest point of an imperceptibly rising table-land,
the horizon of which was from twenty to
forty miles distant. An infinite dome of sky
was expanded above us, an ocean of firmament of
which the dwellers among houses and
mountains can have but little conception. The troops
of glittering stars, the dark, shrouding night,
the unaccustomed voices of my companions,
deepened the awe that oppressed me, and, as I
stood between them, I became as earnest and
occupied as themselves. I forgot everything
but the incomprehensible grandeur of the
universe revealed to me, and the majestic sweep of
the planets across the field of the telescope.
What a freshness of awe and delight came over
me! What floods of thought came, wave upon
wave, across my mind! And how insignificant
I felt before this wilderness of worlds!

I asked, with the humility of a child --for all
affectation had been charmed away--if I might
come again soon?

Martin Fraser met my uplifted eyes with a
keen and penetrating look. I did not quail under
it, for I was thinking only of the stars. As
he looked, his mouth relaxed into a pleased and
genial smile.

"We shall always be glad to see you," he
replied.

Barbara was sitting up for me when I
returned, and was about to address me with
some worldly speculative remark, when I
interrupted her quickly. "Not one word, Barbara,
not one question, or I never go near The Holmes
again."

I cannot dwell upon details. I went often to the
house. Into the dull routine of Mr. Fraser's and
Lucy's life, I came (I suppose) like a streak
of sunshine, lighting up the cloud that had
been creeping over them. To both, I brought
wholesome excitement and merriment, and so I
became dear and necessary to them. But over
myself, there came a great and an almost incredible
change. I had been frivolous, self-seeking, soulless;
but the solemn study I had begun, with
other studies that came in its train, awoke me
from my inanity, to a life of mental activity. I
absolutely forgot my purpose; for I had at once
perceived that Martin Fraser was as distant and
as self-poised as the Polar Star. So I became to
him merely a diligent and insatiable pupil, and
he was to me only a grave and exacting master,
to be propitiated by my most profound
reverence. Each time I crossed the threshold of
his quiet home, all the worldliness and coquetry
of my nature fell from my soul like an unfit
garment, and I entered as into a temple, simple,
real, and worshipping.

The happy summer passed away, the
autumn crept on, and for eight months I had
visited the Frasers constantly, and had never, by
word, or look, or tone, intentionally deceived them.

Lucy Fraser and I had long looked forward to
an eclipse of the moon, which was visible early
in October. I left my home alone in the
twilight of that evening, my thoughts dwelling
upon the coming pleasure, when, just as I drew
near The Holmes, there overtook me one of the
young men with whom I had flirted in former
times.

"Good evening, Stella," he exclaimed
familiarly, "I have not seen you for a long time.
Ah! you are pursuing other game I suppose;
but are you not aiming rather too high this
time? Well, you are in luck just now, for if
Martin Fraser does not come forward, there is
George Yorke, just come home from Australia
with an immense fortune, and he is longing to
remind you of some tender passages between
you before he went out. He was showing us a
lock of your hair after dinner at the Crown
yesterday."

I listened to this speech with no outward
demonstration; but the reality and mortification
of my degradation was gnawing me; and,
hastening onward to my sanctuary, I sought the
presence of my little Lucy Fraser.

"I have done wrong to-day," she said. "I
have been deceitful. I think I ought to tell you,
that you may not think too well of me; but I
want you to love me as much as ever. I have
not told a story, but I have acted one."

Lucy Fraser leaned her tiny brow upon her tiny
fingers, and her eyes closed in silent self-reading.

"My uncle says," she continued, looking up
for a moment, and blushing like a woman, "that
women are, perhaps, less truthful than men.
Because they cannot do things by strength, they
do them by cunning. They live falsely. They
deceive their own selves. Sometimes women
deceive for amusement. He has taught me some
words which I shall understand better some day:

                     To thine own self be true,
    And it will follow as the night the day,
    Thou canst not then be false to any man."

I stood before the child abashed and speechless,
listening with burning cheeks.

"Grandpapa showed me a verse in the Bible
which is awful to me. Listen. 'I find more
bitter than death, the woman whose heart is
snares and nets, and her hands as bands: whoso
pleaseth God shall escape from her, but the
sinner shall be taken by her.'"

I hid my face in my hands though no eye was
on me; for Lucy Fraser had veiled hers with
their tremulous lids; and, as I stood confounded
and self-accused, a hand was laid upon my arm,
and Martin Fraser's voice said,

"The eclipse, Stella!"

I started at this first utterance of my name,
which he had never spoken before. I was
completely unnerved, when I found that Lucy Fraser
was not to accompany us on the terrace. As
Martin Fraser stooped to see if the telescope were
rightly adjusted for my use, I shrank from him.

"What is the meaning of this, Stella?" he
exclaimed, as I burst into tears. "Shall I speak
to you now, Stella?" he said, "while there is
yet time, before you leave us. Does your heart
cling to us as our hearts cling to you, till we
dare not think of the void there will be in our
home when you are gone? We did not live
before we knew you. You are our health and
our life. I have noted you as I never watched
a woman before, and I find no fault in you,
my pearl, my jewel, my star. Hitherto, woman
and deceit have been inseparably conjoined in
my mind; but your innocent heart is the home
of truth. I know you have had no thought of
this, and my vehemence alarms you; but tell
me plainly if you can love me?"

He had taken me in his arms, and my head
rested against his strongly throbbing heart.
His sternness and austerity were gone, and he
offered me the undiminished wealth of a love
that had not been wasted in fickle likings. My
success was perfect, and how gladly would I
have remained there till my silence had grown
eloquent! But Barbara rose to my memory,
and Lucy Fraser's words still tingled in my
ears. The black shadow eating away the heart
of the moon seemed to pause in its measured
motion. All heaven looked down upon us
through the solemn stars. The rustling leaves
were hushed, and the scented autumn breeze
ceased for a minute; a cloud of truth-compelling
witnesses echoed the cry of my awakened
conscience. I withdrew myself, sad and shame-stricken.

"Martin Fraser," I said, "your words
constrain me to be true. I am the falsest
woman you ever met. I came here with the
sole and definite intention of attracting you;
and if you had ever gone out into our circle, you
would have heard of me only as a flirt, a
heartless coquette. I dare not bring falsehood
to your fireside, and the bitterness of death to
your heart. Do not speak to me now; have
patience, and I will write to you!"

He would have detained me, but I sprang
away, and, running swiftly down the avenue, I
passed out of my Eden, with the sentence of
perpetual banishment in my heart. The eclipse
was at the full, and a horror of darkness and
dismay engulfed me, as I stood shivering and
sobbing under the restless poplars.

Barbara met me as I hastened to hide myself
in my own room, and, with her cold glittering
eyes fixed inquiringly on me, said,

"Well, what is the matter with you?"

"Nothing," I answered, "only I am tired of
astronomy, and I shall not go to The Holmes
again. It is of no use."

"I always said so," she replied. "However,
to bring matters to a crisis, I gave Mr. Fraser
notice we should leave at Christmas. Then you
are satisfied that it would be a waste of time to
continue going there?"

"Quite," I said, and passed on to my room,
to learn, through the weary hours of that night,
what desolation and hopelessness meant.

The next day I wrote to Martin Fraser, in
every word sacred truth, excepting that, self-deceived,
and with a false pride even in my utter
humiliation, I told him I had not loved, and did
not love him.

The first object upon which my eyes rested
every joyless morning, were the tall poplar
trees, waving round his house, and beckoning
maddeningly to me. The last thing I saw
at night was the steady light in his library,
shining like a star among the laurels. But, him
I could never see; for my letter had been too
explicit to suggest a hope; and I could not, for
shame, attempt to meet him in his walks. All
that remained, for me was to return to my former
life, if I could by any means feed my hungering
and fainting soul with the husks that had once
satisfied me.

George Yorke renewed his addresses to me,
offering me wealth beyond our expectations.
It was a sore temptation; for before me lay
a monotonous and fretted life with Barbara,
and a solitary, uncared for old age. Why could
not I live as thousands of other women, who
were not unhappy wives? But I remembered
a passage I had read in one of Martin's books:
"It is not always our duty to marry; but it is
always our duty to abide by right; not to
purchase happiness by loss of honour; not to avoid
unweddedness by untruthfulness;" and, setting
my face steadily to meet the bleakness and
bareness of my lot, I rejected the proposal.

Barbara was terribly exasperated; and very
miserable we both were, until she accepted an
invitation to spend the Christmas with one of
her sisters, while I was left, with my old nurse,
to superintend the moving of the furniture. I
wished to linger in our old home till the last
moment; and I was glad to be alone on Christmas-day
in the deserted house, that, in solitude, I
might make my mental record of all its associations
and remembrances, before the place knew
me no more. So, on Christmas-eve, I wandered
through the empty rooms, not more empty than
my heart, which was being dismantled of its old
memories and newer but deeper tendernesses,
until I paused mechanically before the window,
whence I had often looked across to The
Holmes.

The air had been dense and murky all day,
with thickly falling snow; but the storm was
over, and the moonless sky bright with stars:
while the glistening snow reflected light enough
to show me where stood, like a dark mass against
the sky, the house of Martin Fraser. His room
was dark, as it had been for many nights before;
but old Mr. Fraser's window, which was nearer
to our house, emitted a brilliant light across the
white lawn. I was exhausted with over-work
and over-excitement, and leaning there, pressing
my heated cheeks against the frosty panes, I
rehearsed to myself all the incidents of my
intercourse with them; and there followed through
my mind picture after picture, dream within
dream, visions of the happiness that might have
been mine.

As I stood thus, with tears stealing through
the clasped hands that covered my eyes, my
nurse came in to close the shutters. She
started nervously when she saw me.

"I thought you were your mother," she
exclaimed. "I have seen her stand just so, hundreds
of times."

"Susan, how was it that my mother did not
marry Mr. Fraser?"

"They were like other people--didn't understand
one another, much as they were in love,"
she answered. "Mr. Fraser's first marriage had
been for money, and was not a happy one, so he
had grown something stern. They quarrelled,
and your mother was provoked to marry Mr.
Gretton, your father. Well! Mr. Fraser became
an old man all at once, and scarcely ever
left his own house; so that she never saw him
again, near as he lived: though I have often seen
her, when your father was off to balls or races or
public meetings, standing here just as you stood
now. Only the last time you were in her arms, she
was leaning against this window when I brought
you in to say good night, and she whispered
softly, looking up to Heaven, 'I have tried to do
my duty to my husband and to my little child!'"

"Nurse," I said, "leave me; do not shut the
window yet." It was no longer a selfish emotion
that possessed me. I had been murmuring
that there was no sorrow like my sorrow; but
my mother's error had been graver, and her
trials deeper than mine. The burden she had
borne had weighed her down into an early grave;
but it had not passed away from earth with
her. It rested now, heavily augmented by
her death, upon the heart of the aged man, who,
doubtless, in the contemplative time, was reviewing
the events of his past life, and this, chiefly,
because it was the saddest of them all. I longed
to see him once again to see him who had
mourned my mother's death more bitterly and
lastingly than any other being, and I determined
to steal secretly across the fields, and up the
avenue, and, if his window were uncurtained as
its brightness suggested, to look upon him once
more in remembrance of my mother.

I hesitated upon our door-step, as though my
mother and myself were both concerned in some
doubtful enterprise; but, with the hardihood of
my nature, I drove away the scruple, and passed
on into the frosty night.

Yes, the window was uncurtained. I could
tell that at the avenue gate; and I should see
him, whom my mother loved, lying alone and
uncheered upon his couch, as he would lie now
all his weary years through, till Lucy Fraser
was old enough to be a daughter to him. And
then I remembered a rumour that the old man's
grandchild was dying, which Susan had told me
sorrowfully an hour or two ago; and, growing
bewildered, I ran on swiftly until I stood
before the window.

It was no longer an invalid's room; the couch
was gone and the sheltering screen, and Lucy's
little chair within it. Neither were there any
appliances of modern luxury or wealth; no
softness, nor colouring, nor gorgeousness: it was
simply the library and workroom of a busy
student, who was forgetful and negligent of comfort.
Yet, such as it was, my heart recognised it as
home. There Martin sat, deep, as was his wont,
in complicated calculations, and frequent
reference to the books that were strewn about

Could it be possible that yonder absorbed
man had once spoken passionately to me of
love, and now he sat in light, and warmth, and
indifference, almost within reach of my hand,
while I, like an outcast, stood in cold,
and darkness, and despair? Was there, then,
no echo of my footstep lingering about the
threshold, and no shadowy memory of my face
coming between him and his studies? I had
forfeited the right to sit beside him, reading
the observations his pencil noted down, and
chasing away the gloom that was deepening on
his nature; and I had not the hope, which
would have been really a hope and a consolation
to me, that some other woman, more true and more
worthy, would by-and-by own my forfeited right.

I heard a bell tinkle, and Martin rose and left
the room. I wondered if I should have time
to creep in, and steal but one scrap of paper
which had been thrown aside carelessly; but, as
I tremblingly held the handle of the glass door,
he returned, bearing in his arms the emaciated
form of little Lucy Fraser. He had wrapped
her carefully in a large cloak, and now, as he
wheeled a chair to the fire and placed her in it,
every rigid lineament of his countenance was
softened into tenderness. I stretched out my
arms towards him with an intense yearning to
be gathered again to his noble heart, and have
this chill and darkness dissipated; I turned away,
with this last tender image of him graven on my
memory, to retrace my steps to my desolate home.

There was a sudden twittering in the ivy
overhead, and a little bird, pushed out of its nest
into the cold night air, came fluttering down,
and flew against the lighted panes. In an
instant, his dog, which had been uneasy at my
vicinity before, stood baying at the window, and
I had only time to escape and hide myself among
the shrubs, when he opened it, and stepped
out upon the terrace. The dog tracked down
the path by which I had come, barking joyfully
as he careered along the open fields; and, as
Martin looked round, I cowered more closely
into the deepest shadows. I knew he must find
me; for my footmarks were plain upon the
newly-fallen snow, and an extravagant sensation
of shame and gladness overpowered me. I saw
him lose the footprints once or twice, but at
last he was upon the right trace, and, lifting the
boughs beneath which I had hidden, he found
me among the laurels. I was crouching, and he
stooped down curiously.

"It is Stella," I said, faintly.

"Stella?" he echoed.

He lifted me from the ground like a truant
child, whom he had expected home every hour,
carried me across the terrace into the library,
and set me down in the light and warmth of
his own hearth. One little kiss to the child,
whose eyes beamed with a strange light upon
us; and then, taking both my hands in his, he
bent down and read my face. I met his gaze
unshrinkingly, eye to eye. We sounded the
depths of each other's heart in that long,
unwavering look. Never more could there be doubt
or mistrust; never again deception or
misconstruction, between us.

Our star had arisen, and full orbed, rounded
into perfection, shed a soft and brilliant light
upon the years to come. Chime after chime,
like the marriage peal of our souls, came the
sound of distant bells across the snow, and
roused us from our reverie.

"I thought I had lost you altogether," said
Martin to me. "I believed you would come
back to me, somehow, at some time; but this
evening I heard, that you were gone, and I was
telling Lucy Fraser so, not long since. She has
been pining to see you."

Now, he suffered me to take the child upon
my lap, and she nestled closely to me, with a
weary sigh, resting her head upon my bosom.
Just then, we heard the carol singers coming
up the avenue, and Martin drew the curtains
over the window, before which they stationed
themselves to sing the legend of the miraculous
star in the East.

When the singers ended and raised their cry
of "We wish you a merry Christmas, and a
happy New Year!" he went out into the porch
to speak to them, and I hid my face in the
child's curls, and thanked God who had so
changed me.

"But what is this, Martin?" I cried in terror,
as I raised my head, on his return.

The child's downcast eyes were closely sealed,
and her little firm hand had grown lax and
nerveless. Insensible and breathless, she lay in
my arms like a withering flower.

"It is only fainting," said Martin; "she has
been drooping ever since you left us, Stella;
and my only hope of her recovery rests in your
ministering care."

All that night, I sat with the little child resting
on my bosom; revived from her deathlike
swoon, and sleeping calmly in my arms
because she was already beginning to share in
the life and joy and brightness of my heart. There
was perfect silence and tranquillity enclosing us
in a blissful oasis, interrupted only once by the
entrance of my nurse, who had been found by Martin
in a state of the utmost perplexity and alarm.

The happy Christmas morning dawned. I
asked my nurse to arrange my hair in the style
in which my mother used to wear hers. And
when, after a long conversation with Susan,
Mr. Fraser received me as his daughter with
great emotion and affection, and oftener called
me Maria than Stella, I was satisfied to be
identified with my mother. Then, in the evening,
sitting amongst them, a passion of trembling
and weeping seized me, which could only be
soothed by their fondest assurances. After
which I sang them some old songs, with nothing
in them but their simple melody; and Mr.
Fraser talked freely of former years and of the
times to come; and Lucy's eyes almost laughed.

Then Martin took me home along the familiar
path, which I had so often traversed alone and
fearless; but the excess of gladness made me
timid, and at every unusual sound I crept closer
to him, with a sweet sense of being protected.

One sunny day in spring, with blithe Lucy
and triumphant dictatress Barbara for my bridesmaids,
I accepted, humbly and joyfully, the
blessed lot of being Martin Fraser's wife. And
even in the scenes of the empty-headed folly of
my girlhood, I thenceforth tried to be better,
and to do my duty in love, gratitude, and devotion.
Only, at first, Martin pretended not to believe
that on that night I stole out to have a last
glimpse, not of him, but of his father: I knowing
nothing of the change that had transformed
Mr. Fraser's sitting-room into his own study.



THE GHOST IN THE DOUBLE ROOM

WAS the next Ghost on my list. I had noted the
rooms down in the order in which they were drawn,
and this was the order we were to follow. I
invoked the Spectre of the Double Room, with the
least possible delay, because we all observed John
Herschel's wife to be much affected, and we all
refrained, as if by common consent, from glancing
at one another. Alfred Starling, with the tact and
good feeling which are never wanting in him,
briskly responded to my call, and declared the
Double Room to be haunted by the Ghost of the
Ague.

"What is the Ghost of the Ague like?" asked every
one, when there had been a laugh.

"Like?" said Alfred. "Like the Ague."

"What is the Ague like?" asked somebody.

"Don't you know?" said Alfred. "I'll tell you."

We had both, Tilly--by which affectionate
diminutive I mean my adored Matilda--and
your humble servant, agreed that it was not only
inexpedient, but in the highest degree contrary
to the duty we owed to the community at large,
to wait any longer. I had a hundred arguments
to bring forward against the baleful effects of
long engagements; and Tilly began to quote
poetry of a morbid tendency. Our parents
and guardians entertained different opinions.
My uncle Bonsor wanted us to wait till the
shares in the Caerlyon-upon-Usk Something
or Other Company, in which undertaking I was
vicariously interested, were at a premium--they
have been at a hopeless discount for years.
Tilly's papa and mamma called Tilly a girl and
self a boy, when we were nothing whatsoever of
the kind, and only the most ardent and faithful
pair of young lovers that had existed since the
time of Abelard and Helose, or Florio and
Biancafiore. As, however, our parents and
guardians were not made of adamant or Roman
cement, we were not permitted to add another
couple to the catalogue of historically unfortunate
lovers. Uncle Bonsor and Mr. and Mrs.
Captain Standfast (my Tilly's papa and mamma)
at last relented. Much was effected towards
this desirable consummation by my arguments
against celibacy, contained in eight pages foolscap,
and of which I made copies in triplicate for
the benefit of our hard-hearted relatives. More
was done by Tilly threatening to poison herself.
Most, however, was accomplished by our both
making up our minds to tell a piece thereof to
our parents and guardians, and telling them that
if they did not acquiesce in our views we would
run away and get married at the very first
opportunity. There was no just cause or
impediment. We were young, healthy, and had
plenty of money between us. Loads of money--
as we thought then. As to personal appearance,
Tilly was simply Lovely, and my whiskers had
not been ill spoken of in the best society in
Dover. So it was all arranged, and on
the twenty-seventh of December, eighteen
fifty dash, being the morrow of Boxing-day,
Alfred Starling, gent., was to be united in
the holy bonds of matrimony to Matilda, only
daughter of Captain Rockleigh Standfast, R.N.,
of Snargatestone Villa, Dover.

I had been left an orphan at a very early age,
and the guardian of my moderate property
(including the shares in the Caerlyon-upon-Usk
Something or Other concern), and guardian of my
person, was my uncle Bonsor. He sent me to
Merchant Taylors', and afterwards for a couple
of years to college at Bonn, on the Rhine. He
afterwards--to keep me out of mischief, I believe
--paid a handsome premium for my entrance into
the counting-house of Messrs. Baum, Brmm, and
Boompjees, German merchants, of Finsbury
Circus, under whose tutelage I did as little as I
liked in the corresponding department, and was
much envied by my brother salaried clerks. My
uncle Bonsor resided chiefly at Dover, where he
was making large sums of money by government
contracts, whose objects apparently consisted in
boring holes in the chalk and then filling them
up again. My uncle was, perhaps, the most
respectable man in Europe, and was well known
in the city of London as "Responsible Bonsor."
He was one of those men who are confidently
said to be "good for any amount." He had a
waistcoat--worn winter and summer--a
waistcoat that wavered in hue between a sunny buff
and a stony drab, which looked so ineffably
respectable that I am certain if it had been
presented at the pay-counter of any bank in
Lombard-street the clerks would have cashed it at
once for any amount of notes or gold demanded.
My uncle Bonsor entrenched himself behind this
astonishing garment as behind a fortification,
and fired guns of respectability at you. That
waistcoat had carried resolutions, assuaged the
ire of indignant shareholders, given stability to
wavering schemes, and brought in thumping
subscriptions for burnt-out Caffres and destitute
Fee-jees. It was a safe waistcoat, and Bonsor
was a safe man. He was mixed up with a good
many companies; but whenever a projector or
promoter came to him with a plan, my responsible
uncle would confer with his waistcoat, and
within five minutes would either tell the
projector or promoter to walk out of his counting-house,
or put his name down for a thousand
pounds. And the scheme was made that
Responsible Bonsor put his name down for.

It was arranged that I was to go down to
Dover on Christmas-eve, staying at my uncle's,
and that we were to dine all together at
Captain Standfast's on Christmas-day. Boxing-day
was to be devoted to bonnets on the part of
my beloved, and to the signing and sealing of
certain releases, deeds, covenants, and other
documents connected with law and money, on the
part of self, my uncle, and my prospective papa
in-law, and on the twenty-seventh we were to
be MARRIED.

Of course my connexion with Messrs. Baum,
Brmm, and Boompjees was brought to an
amicable termination. I gave the clerks a
grand treat at a hostelry in Newgate-street,
and had the pleasure of receiving, at a
somewhat late hour, and at least eighty-seven
times, a unanimous choral assurance, not
unaccompanied by hiccups, that I was a "jolly good
fellow." I was unwillingly compelled to defer
my departure for Dover till the 8.30 P.M. express
mail on Christmas-eve, being engaged to a farewell
dinner at four, at the mansion of our Mr. Max
Boompjees, junior and dinner-giving partner in
the firm, in Finsbury Circus. A capital dinner
it was, and very merry. I left the gentlemen
over their wine, and had just time to pop into a
cab and catch the mail train at London Bridge.

You know how quickly time passes on a railway
journey when one has dined comfortably
before starting. I seemed to have been
telegraphed down to Dover, so rapidly were the
eighty odd miles skimmed over. But it now
becomes my duty to impart to you the
knowledge of my Terrible Misfortune. In my youth,
a little boy at a preparatory school near Ashford,
I had experienced a touch of the dreadful disease
of the Kentish marshes. How long this malady
had lain concealed in my frame, and by what
accident of time or temperature it became again
evolved, I had no means of judging, but by the
time the train arrived at Dover I was in the
throes of acute AGUE.

It was a horrible, persistent, regular shivering
and shaking, a racking palsy, a violent
tremor, accompanied, I am sure, by fever,
for my temples throbbed, and I experienced
an almost deafening, jarring, rattling noise
in the head. My blood seemed all in
revolt, and surging backwards and forwards in my
veins, and my unhappy body swayed from side
to side with the distempered current. On the
platform I staggered to and fro; and the porter,
of whose arm I caught hold to steady myself,
seemed, lantern and all, by mere communicated
violence, to be shaken and buffeted about as I
was. I had always been an abstemious young
man, and had not exceeded in the consumption
of the hospitable junior partner's rare old hock;
besides, for all the noise in my head, I could
think and talk --albeit my teeth chattered, and
my tongue wagged in my mouth with aguish
convulsions. I had never known before that
railway porters were a hard hearted race, but
one tall man in velveteen grinned most impertinently
as I was helped into a fly, and I am certain
that his companion, a short, fat fellow, with
a leer in his eye, thrust his tongue into his cheek
as he heaped, at my desire, great-coats and rugs
over me, and bade the flyman drive to the
Marine Parade, where my uncle resided. I had
told every one at the station about my attack of
ague.

"He's got his load," I heard the tall porter
exclaim, as we drove off. Of course he meant
that the flyman had got all my luggage.

It was a dreadful five minutes' ride to my
uncle's. The fit was so strong on me that my
head and limbs kept bumping against opposite
sides of the fly, and once came in contact with
the window-glass. And the noise in my head
never ceased. I stumbled out, somehow, when
the vehicle stopped, and, clinging to the knocker
of the avuncular door, struck such a quivering
peal of blows--I had previously scattered the
cabman's fare on the pavement in the attempt
to place the money in his hand--that Jakes,
my uncle's confidential man, who opened the
door, stared with astonishment.

"I'm very ill, Jakes," I stammered, when I
had staggered into the hall. "I'm down with
that dreadful Ague again."

"Yes, sir," answered Jakes, with something
like a grin on his countenance too. "Compts
of the season, sir. Hadn't you better go to
bed, sir?"

Now the house was all lighted up, for there
was to be a snapdragon party, and I knew that
my Tilly and all the Standfasts were up-stairs
with my uncle and his waistcoat, and that they
were to wait for my arrival before lighting the
bowl. And, ill as I was, I burned to see my
darling.

"No, Jakes," I said, "I'll try and bear up.
You had better bring me a little cognac, and
some very hot water, into the dining-room. It
will do me good, and the fit may leave me."
What would you believe was the reply of this
pampered domestic?

"Better not, sir," he had the hardihood to
observe. "Christmas time, sir. Plenty more
like you. Better go to bed, sir. Think of your
head in the morning, sir."

"Fellow--" I began to retort, still
violently trembling, when I saw my uncle Bonsor
appear at the head of the staircase. There was
a group of ladies and gentlemen in the
background, and as well as I could see for shaking,
there were the dear golden curls of my Tilly.
But her face looked so scared and terrified.

"Alfred," said my uncle, sternly, from behind
his waistcoat, "you ought to be ashamed of
yourself. Go to bed directly, sir!"

"Uncle!" I cried, with a desperate attempt
to keep myself steady, "do you think I'm--"
Here I made an effort to ascend the staircase,
but my foot caught either in the carpet or over
one of the confounded brass rods, and, upon my
word, I tumbled heels over heels into the hall.
And yet, even as I lay recumbent, I shook worse
than ever. I heard my uncle's responsible
voice ordering the servants to carry me to bed.
And I was carried too; Jakes and a long-legged
foot-page conveying my shaking body to my
bedroom.

The night was brief and terrible as in an access
of fever, and I lay shaking and chattering in the
burning bed. In the morning, my uncle sent
word to say that my ague was all nonsense,
and that I was to come down to breakfast.

I went down, determined on remonstrance,
but holding on by the banisters and quivering
in every limb. O! for the tribulations of that
wretched Christmas-day. I was received with
sneers, and advised to take very strong tea with
a little cognac; yet soon afterwards my uncle
shook hands with me, and said that it was only
once a year, and that he supposed boys would
be boys. Everybody wished me a merry Christmas;
but I could only return the compliments
of the season in a spasmodic stutter. I took a
walk on the pier immediately after breakfast,
but I nearly tumbled into the sea, and bumped
against so many posts, that I had to be led
home by a mariner in a yellow sou'-wester hat,
who insisted that I should give him five shillings
to drink my health. Then came a more appalling
ordeal. I was to call at Snargatestone Villa to
accompany my Tilly and the family to church.
To my great relief, though I was shaking in
every joint of my fingers and toes, nobody took
any notice of my alarming complaint. I began
to hope that it might be intermittent, and
would pass off, but it wouldn't, and rather
increased in violence. My darling girl patted me
on the head, and hoped that I was "a good boy,
now;" but when I began, shiveringly, to
explain my attack of ague, she only laughed. We
went to church, and then my ague soon brought
me into disgrace again. First I created terrible
scandal by knocking up against the old pauper
women in the free seats, and nearly upsetting
the beadle. Then I knocked the church services
and hymn-books off the ledge of the pew. Then
I kicked a hassock from beneath the very knees
of my future mamma-in-law. Then I trod--
accidentally I declare--on the toes of Mary
Seaton, my Tilly's pretty cousin; whereupon she
gave a little scream, and my beloved looked
daggers at me; and as a climax, in the agony of
that extraordinary horizontal shaking fit of mine,
I burst the pew door open, and tumbled once
more against the beadle, who in stern tones,
and in the name of the churchwardens, desired
me either to behave myself or to leave the
church. I saw that it was no good contending
against my complaint, so I did leave; but
as I lurched out of the edifice I seemed to see
the clergyman shaking in the reading-desk, and
the clerk wagging to and fro beneath him; while
the hatchments and tablets shook on the walls;
and the organ in the gallery kept bumping
now against the charity boys, now against the
charity girls.

It wasn't vertigo: the head swims round
under that circumstance. It was clearly ague,
and of the very worst description; the body
shaking from right to left, and the blood surging
in the ears with fever.

At dinner-time--my agonies had never
ceased, but had not attracted notice--I began
literally to put my foot into it again. First,
handing Mrs. Van Plank of Sandwich down
to the dining-room--my uncle Bonsor escorted
Tilly--I entangled myself in the bugle ornaments
which that wealthy but obese woman
persisted in wearing; and we came down
together with alarming results. I was undermost,
shaking miserably, with Mrs. Van Plank's large
person pressing on my shirt-studs. When we were
assisted to rise she would not be appeased. She
would not join us at dinner. She ordered her
fly and returned to Sandwich, and as the
carriage drove away, Captain Standfast, R.N.,
looking at me as savagely as though he would
have liked to have me up at the gangway and
give me six dozen on the instant, said,

"There goes poor Tilly's diamond bracelet.
The old screw won't give it her now. I saw
the case on the cushion of the fly."

Was it my fault! could I help my lamentable
ague?

At dinner I went from bad to worse. Item:
I spilt two ladlefuls of mock turtle soup over a
new damask tablecloth. Item: I upset a glass
of Madeira over Mary Seaton's blue moire dress.
Item: in a convulsive fit of shaking, I nearly
stabbed Lieutenant Lamb, of the Fifty-fourth
Regiment, stationed on the Heights, with a silver
fork; and, finally, in a maniacal attempt to
carve a turkey, I sent the entire body or that
Christmas bird, with a garland of sausages clinging
to it, full butt into the responsible waistcoat
of my uncle Bonsor.

The peace was made somehow; I'm sure
I don't know in what manner, but half an hour
afterwards we were all very pleasant and talkative
over our dessert. When I say all, I of
course except my unhappy self. There had been
no solution of continuity in my shaking. Somebody,
I think, proposed my health. In returning
thanks, I hit the proposer a tremendous blow
under the left eye with my elbow. Endeavouring
to regain my equilibrium, I sent a full glass
of claret into the embroidered cambric bosom of
that unhappy Lieutenant Lamb. In desperation
I caught hold of the tablecloth with both hands.
I saw how it would be; the perfidious polished
mahogany slid away from my grasp. I turned
my foot frantically round the leg of the table
nearest me, and with a great crash over went
dining-table, cut-glass decanters, and dessert.
Lieutenant Lamb was badly hit across the bridge
of the nose with a pair of silver nut-crackers,
and my uncle Bonsor's head was crowned, in
quite a classic manner, with filberts and hot-house
grapes.

The bleak December sun rose next morning
upon ruin and catastrophe. As well as I can
collect my scattered reminiscences of that dismal
time, my offences against decorum were once
more condoned: not in consequence of my
complaint (in which my relatives and friends
persisted in disbelieving), but on the ground that it
was "only once a year." Lawyers came backwards
and forwards to Snargatestone Villa during
the forenoon. There was a great production of
tin boxes, red tape, blue seals, foolscap paper,
and parchment; and my uncle Bonsor was more
responsible than ever. They brought me a paper
to sign at last, whispering much among
themselves as they did so; and I protest that I could
see nothing but a large pool of white, jogging
about in a field of green tablecloth, while on
the paper an infinity of crabbed characters
seemed racing up and down in a crazed and
furious manner. I endeavoured to nerve myself
to the task of signing, I bit my lips, I clenched
my left hand, I tried to screw my wagging head on
to my neck, I cramped my toes up in my boots,
I held my breath; but was it my fault, when I
clutched the pen and tried to write my name,
that the abominable goosequill began to dance,
and skate, and leap, and plunge, and dig its
nibs into the paper; that when, in despair, I
seized the inkstand, to hold it nearer to the pen,
I shook its sable contents, in horrid, horned,
tasseled blots, all over a grave legal document?
I finished my achievement by inflicting a large
splash on my uncle's sacred waistcoat, and
hitting Captain Standfast under the third rib
with the pen.

"That will do," my papa-in-law cried, collaring
me. "Leave the house, scoundrel!"

But I broke from his grasp, and fled to the
drawing-room, knowing that my Tilly would be
there with her bridesmaids and her bonnets.

"Tilly--my adored Matilda!" I cried.

"No further explanation is needed, sir," broke
in my beloved, in an inexorable tone. "I have
seen and heard quite enough. Alfred Starling,
I would sooner wed the meanest hind that
gathers samphire on yon cliff than become the
bride of a profligate and drunkard. Go, sir;
repent if you can; be ashamed if you can.
Henceforth we are strangers. Slave of self-indulgence,
adieu for ever!" And she swept out
of the room, and I could hear her sobbing her
pretty heart out in the boudoir beyond.

I was discarded and expelled for ever from
Snargatestone Villa; my uncle Bonsor
repudiated me, and disinherited me from any share
in his waistcoat; I hurled myself into the next
train at the station, and shook all the way
back to town. At about dusk on that dreadful
Boxing-day, I found myself wandering and
jolting about the purlieus of Soho.

From Soho-square the south-west side, I
think--branches a shabby, dingy little court,
called Bateman's-buildings. I was standing
shivering at the corner of this ill-favoured place,
when I stumbled against a gentleman, who
looked about seven-eighths soldier and one-eighth
civilian.

He was a little, dapper, clean-limbed, young-looking
old man, with a yellow face, and grey
hair and whiskers. Soldiers, save in the cavalry,
didn't wear moustaches then. He wore a blue
uniform coat, rather white at the seams, and a
silver medal with a faded ribbon on his breast.
He had a bunch of parti-coloured streamers in his
undress cap; he carried a bamboo-cane under
his arm; on each sleeve he wore golden stripes,
much tarnished; on his scarlet collar was
embroidered a golden lion; and on his shoulders
he had a pair of little, light, golden epaulettes,
that very much resembled two sets of teeth
from a dentist's glass-case, covered with bullion.

"And how are you, my hearty?" said the
military gentleman, cheerily.

I answered that I was the most miserable
wretch in the world; upon which the military
gentleman, slapping me on the back and calling
me his gallant comrade, asked me to have a pint
of beer, warmed with a little spice, and a dash of
Old Tom in it, for the sake of Christmas.

"You're a roving buck," observed my new
friend. "I'm a roving buck. Yon never
happened to have a twin-brother named Siph, did
you?"

"No," I answered, moodily.

"He was as like you as two peas," continued
the military gentleman, who had by this time
taken my arm, and was leading me all shaking
and clattering towards a mouldy little tavern, on
whose door-jambs were displayed a couple of
coloured cartoons, framed and glazed and much
fly-blown, and displaying, the one, the presentment
of an officer in sky-blue uniform much
belaced with silver, and the other a bombadier
with an enormous shako ramming the charge
into a cannon: the whole surmounted by a
placard setting forth that smart young men were
required for the Honourable East India
Company's infantry, cavalry, and artillery, and
earnestly exhorting all smart young men, as
aforesaid, to apply forthwith to Sergeant-Major
Chutnee, who was always to be heard of at the
bar of the "Highland Laddie," or at the office
in Bateman's-buildings.

"The last time I saw him," went on the man with
the yellow face and the grey whiskers, when he had
tilted me into the "Highland Laddie," pinned me,
shaking, against the bar-counter, and ordered a
pint of sophisticated beer, "he had left our
service, and was a field-marshal in the army of
the King of Oude. Many's the time I've seen him
with his cocked-hat and di'mond epulets riding on
a white elephant, with five-and-twenty black-fellows
running after him to brush the flies away
and draw the soda-water corks. Such brandy he'd
have with it, and all through meeting me
promiscuous in this very public."

It is useless to prolong the narrative of my
conversation with the military gentleman;
suffice it to say, that within an hour I had taken
the fatal shilling, and enlisted in the service of
the Honourable East India Company. I was
not a beggar. I possessed property, over which
my uncle Bonsor had no control. I had not
committed any crime; but I felt lost, ruined, and
desperate, and I enlisted. For a wonder, when I
was brought before a magistrate to be attested,
and before a surgeon to be examined respecting
my sanitary fitness for the service, my ague
seemed entirely to have left me. I stood firm
and upright in the witness-box, and under the
measuring standard, and was only deterred by
shame and anguish at the misconstruction put
upon my conduct at Dover from negotiating for
my discharge.

I had scarcely reached the East India recruiting
dept at Brentwood, however, before the
attacks of ague returned with redoubled severity.
At first, on my stating that I had an ear for music,
they began to train me for a bandsman, but I
could not keep a wind instrument in my hands,
and struck those that were played by my
comrades from their grasp. Then, I was put into
the awkward squad among the recruits, and the
sergeants caned me; but I could never get
beyond the preliminary drill of the goose-step,
and I kept my own time, and not the squad's,
even then. The dept surgeons wouldn't place
the slightest credence in my ague, and the
sergeant-major of my company reported that I was
a skulking, "malingering" impostor. Among
my comrades who despised, without pitying me,
I got the nickname of "Young Shivery-Shakery."
And the most wonderful thing is, that, although
I could have procured remittances at any time,
the thought of purchasing my discharge never
entered my poor, shaking, jarring head.

How they came to send such a trembling,
infirm creature as a soldier to India, I can't make
out; but sent I was, by long sea, in a troop-ship,
with seven or eight hundred more recruits. My
military career in the East came to a very
speedy and inglorious termination. We had
scarcely arrived at Bombay when the battalion
of the European regiment into which I was
draughted was sent up-country to the banks of
the Sutlej, where the Sikh war was then raging.
It was the campaign of Aliwal and Sobraon,
but it was very little that I saw of that glorious
epoch in our military annals. In contemptuous
reference to my nervous disorder, I was only
permitted to form part of the baggage-guard,
and one night, after perhaps ten days' march,
throughout which I had shaken most awfully,
an attack was made on our rear for mere
purposes of plunder by a few rascally budmashes
or thieves. Nothing was easier than to put
these paltry scoundrels to the rout. I had been
brave enough as a lad and as a young man. I
declare that on the present occasion I didn't
run away; but my unhappy disease got the
mastery of me. I shook my musket out of my
hands, my shako off my head, and my knapsack
off my back, and my wretched legs shook and
jolted me, as it seemed, over miles of arid
country. There was some talk of shooting me
afterwards, and some of flogging me; but
corporal punishment did not exist in the Company's
army. They sent me to a vile place of
incarceration called a "congee house," where I was
fed principally on rice-water, and at last I
was conveyed to Bombay, tried by court-martial,
sentenced, and publicly drummed out of my
regiment as a coward. Yes, I, the son of a
gentleman, and the possessor of a genteel private
property, had the facings cut off my uniform,
and, to the sound of the "Rogues' March," was
dismissed from the service of the Honourable
East India Company with ignominy and
disgrace.

I can scarcely tell how I reached England
again; whether a berth was given me, whether
I paid for it, or whether I worked my passage
home. I can only remember that the ship in
which I was a passenger broke her back in
Algoa Bay, close to the Cape, and became a
total wreck. There was not the slightest danger;
we were surrounded by large and small craft,
and every soul on board was saved; but I shook
so terribly and incessantly while the boats were
leaving the vessel, that the whole ship's company
hooted and groaned at me when I was shoved
over the side, and I was not allowed to go in
the long-boat, but was towed alone and aft in
the dingy to shore.

I took passage in another ship, which did
nothing but shake all the way from the Cape to
Plymouth, and at last I reached England. I
wrote innumerable letters to my friends and
relatives, to Tilly and to my uncle Bonsor; but the
only answer I received was a few formal lines
from my uncle's lawyer, telling me that my
illegible scrawls had come to the hands of the
persons for whom they were designed; but that
no further notice could be taken of my
communications. I was put into the possession of my
property to the last penny, but it seems to me
that I must have shaken it away either at dice
or bagatelle, or ninepins or billiards. And I
remember that I never made a stroke at the
latter game without hitting my adversary with
the cue in the chest, knocking down the marker,
sending the balls scudding through the
windows, disarranging the scores, and cutting holes
in the cloth, for which I had to pay innumerable
guineas to the proprietor of the rooms.

I remember one day going into a jeweller's
shop in Regent-street to purchase a watch-key.
I had only a silver one now, my gold repeater
had been shaken away in some unaccountable
manner. It was winter-time, and I wore an
overcoat with long loose sleeves. While the
shopkeeper was adjusting a key to my watch,
my ague fit came upon me with demoniacal
ferocity, and, to my horror and dismay, in
catching hold of the counter to save myself, I
tilted a trayful of diamond rings over. Some
fell on the floor; but some, horror and
anguish! fell into the sleeves of my overcoat. I
shook so that I seemed to have shaken diamond
rings into my hands, my pockets, my very boots.
By some uncontrollable impulse I attempted
flight, but was seized at the very shop door,
and carried, shaking, to the police-station.

I was taken before a magistrate, and
committed, still shaking, in a van, to gaol. I shook
for some time in a whitewashed cell, when I
was brought up, shaking, to the Central Criminal
Court, and placed, shaking, on my trial for an
attempted robbery of fifteen hundred pounds'
worth of property. The evidence was clear
against me. My counsel tried to plead something
about "kleptomania," but in vain. My
uncle Bonsor, who had come expressly up from
Dover, spoke strongly against my character. I
was found guilty; yes, I, the most innocent and
unfortunate young man breathing, and sentenced
to seven years' transportation! I can recal the
awful scene vividly to memory now. The jury
in a body were shaking their heads at me. So
was the judge, so was my uncle Bonsor, so were
the spectators in the gallery; and I was holding
on by the spikes on the ledge of the dock,
shaking from right to left like ten thousand
million aspen-leaves. My skull was splitting,
my brain was bursting, when--

                           I WOKE.

I was lying in a very uncomfortable position
in a first-class carriage of the Dover mail-train;
everything in the carriage was shaking; the oil
was surging to and fro in the lamp; my
companions were swaying to and fro, and the sticks
and umbrellas were rattling in the network above.
The train was "at speed," and my frightful dream
was simply due to the violent and unusual
oscillation of the train. Then, sitting up, and rubbing
my eyes, immensely relieved, but holding
on by the compartments near me (so violently
did the carriages shake from side to side), I
began to remember what I had dreamed or
heard of others' dreams before; while at sea,
or while somebody was knocking loudly at the
door; and of the odd connexions between
unusual sound and motion on the thoughts of our
innermost souls. And again with odd distinctness
I remember that at one period of my
distempered vision, namely, when I was attested
and examined as a recruit, I had remained
perfectly still and steady. This temporary freedom
from ague I was fain to ascribe to the customary
two or three minutes' stoppage of the train at
Tunbridge Wells. But, thank Heaven, all this
was but a dream!

"Enough to shake one's head off!" exclaimed
the testy old lady opposite, alluding to the
oscillation of the train, as the guard appeared
at the window with a shout of "Do--VOR !"

"Well, mum, it have bin a shaking most
unusual all the way down," replied that
functionary. "Thought we should have bin off the
line, more than once. Screws will be looked to
to-morrow morning. 'Night, sir!"--this was to
me: I knew the man well. "Merry Christmas
and a happy new year! You'll be wanting a fly
to Snargatestone Villa, won't you, sir? Now,
por --TER !"

I did want that fly, and I had it. I paid the
driver liberally, and did not scatter his money
over the pavement. Mr. Jakes insisted upon
my having something hot in the dining-room the
moment I arrived. The weather was so "woundy
cold," he said. I joined the merry party
upstairs, and was received by my Tilly with open
arms, and by my uncle Bonsor with an open
waistcoat. I partook in cheerful moderation of
the snapdragon festivities of Christmas-eve.
We all dined together on Christmas-day, and I
helped the soup and carved a turkey, beautifully;
and on the morrow, Boxing-day, was complimented
by my uncle's lawyer on my remarkably
neat caligraphy, as displayed in the
signatures to the necessary legal documents.
On the twenty-seventh of December, eighteen
forty-six, I was married to my darling Tilly,
and was going to live happy ever afterwards,
when

                I WOKE AGAIN

--really did wake in bed in this Haunted House
--and found that I had been very much shaken
on the railway coming down, and that there was
no marriage, no Tilly, no Mary Seaton, no Van
Plank, no anything but myself and the Ghost of
the Ague, and the two inner windows of the
Double Room rattling like the ghosts of two
departed watchmen who wanted spiritual
assistance to carry me to the dead and gone old
Watch-house.



THE GHOST IN THE PICTURE ROOM

BELINDA, with a modest self-possession quite her
own, promptly answered for this Spectre in a low,
clear voice:

The lights extinguished; by the hearth I leant,
Half weary with a listless discontent.
The flickering giant shadows, gathering near,
Closed round me with a dim and silent fear;
All dull, all dark; save when the leaping flame,
Glancing, lit up The Picture's ancient frame.
Above the hearth it hung. Perhaps the night,
My foolish tremors, or the gleaming light,
Lent Power to that Portrait dark and quaint--
A Portrait such as Rembrandt loved to paint--
The likeness of a Nun. I seemed to trace
A world of sorrow in the patient face,
In the thin hands folded across her breast--
Its own and the room's shadow hid the rest.
I gazed and dreamed, and the dull embers stirred,
Till an old legend that I once had heard
Came back to me; linked to the mystic gloom
Of the dark Picture in the ghostly room.

In the far South, where clustering vines are hung;
Where first the old chivalric lays were sung;
Where earliest smiled that gracious child of France,
Angel and Knight and Fairy, called Romance,
I stood one day. The warm blue June was spread
Upon the earth; blue summer overhead,
Without a cloud to fleck its radiant glare,
Without a breath to stir its sultry air.
All still, all silent, save the sobbing rush
Of rippling waves, that lapsed in silver hush
Upon the beach; where, glittering towards the strand
The purple Mediterranean kissed the land.

All still, all peaceful; when a convent chime
Broke on the mid-day silence for a time,
Then trembling into quiet, seemed to cease,
In deeper silence and more utter peace.
So as I turned to gaze, where gleaming white,
Half hid by shadowy trees from passers' sight,
The convent lay, one who had dwelt for long
In that fair home of ancient tale and song,
Who knew the story of each cave and hill,
And every haunting fancy lingering still
Within the land, spake thus to me, and told
The convent's treasured legend, quaint and old:

Long years ago, a dense and flowering wood,
Still more concealed where the white convent stood,
Borne on its perfumed wings the title came:
"Our Lady of the Hawthorns" is its name.
Then did that bell, which still rings out to-day
Bid all the country rise, or eat, or pray.
Before that convent shrine, the haughty knight
Passed the lone vigil of his perilous fight;
For humbler cottage strife, or village brawl,
The abbess listened, prayed, and settled all.
Young hearts that came, weighed down by love or wrong,
Left her kind presence comforted and strong.
Each passing pilgrim, and each beggar's right
Was food, and rest, and shelter for the night.
But, more than this, the nuns could well impart
The deepest mysteries of the healing art;
Their store of herbs and simples was renowned,
And held in wondering faith for miles around.
Thus strife, love, sorrow, good and evil fate,
Found help and blessing at the convent gate.

Of all the nuns, no heart was half so light,
No eyelids veiling glances half as bright,
No step that glided with such noiseless feet,
No face that looked so tender or so sweet,
No voice that rose in choir so pure, so clear,
No heart to all the others half so dear
(So surely touched by others' pain or woe,
Guessing the grief her young life could not know),
No soul in childlike faith so undefiled,
As Sister Angela's, the "Convent Child."
For thus they loved to call her. She had known
No home, no love, no kindred, save their own--
An orphan, to their tender nursing given,
Child, plaything, pupil, now the bride of Heaven.
And she it was who trimmed the lamp's red light
That swung before the altar, day and night.
Her hands it was, whose patient skill could trace
The finest broidery, weave the costliest lace;
But most of all, her first and dearest care,
The office she would never miss or share,
Was every day to weave fresh garlands sweet,
To place before the shrine at Mary's feet.
Nature is bounteous in that region fair,
For even winter has her blossoms there.
Thus Angela loved to count each feast the best,
By telling with what flowers the shrine was dressed,
In pomp supreme the countless Roses passed,
Battalion on battalion thronging fast,
Each with a different banner, flaming bright,
Damask, or striped, or crimson, pink, or white,
Until they bowed before the new-born queen,
And the pure virgin lily rose serene.
Though Angela always thought the Mother blest,
Must love the time of her own hawthorns best
Each evening through the year, with equal care,
She placed her flowers; then kneeling down in prayer,

As their faint perfume rose before the shrine,
So rose her thoughts, as pure and as divine.
She knelt until the shades grew dim without,
Till one by one the altar lights shone out,
Till one by one the nuns, like shadows dim,
Gathered around to chant their vesper hymn;
Her voice then led the music's winged flight,
And "Ave, Maris Stella" filled the night.

But wherefore linger on those days of peace?
When storms draw near, then quiet hours must cease.
War, cruel war, defaced the land, and came
So near the convent with its breath of flame,
That, seeking shelter, frightened peasants fled,
Sobbing out tales of coming fear and dread.
Till after a fierce skirmish, down the road,
One night came straggling soldiers, with their load
Of wounded, dying comrades; and the band,
Half pleading, yet as if they could command,
Summoned the trembling sisters, craved their care,
Then rode away, and left the wounded there.
But soon compassion bade all fear depart,
And bidding every sister do her part,
Some prepare simples, healing salves, or bands,
The abbess chose the more experienced hands,
To dress the wounds needing most skilful care;
Yet even the youngest novice took her share,
And thus to Angela, whose ready will
And pity could not cover lack of skill,
The charge of a young wounded knight must fall,
A case which seemed least dangerous of them all.
Day after day she watched beside his bed,
And first in utter quiet the hours fled:
His feverish moans alone the silence stirred,
Or her soft voice, uttering some pious word.
At last the fever left him; day by day
The hours, no longer silent, passed away.
What could she speak of? First, to still his plaints,
She told him legends of the martyr'd saints;
Described the pangs, which, through God's plenteous grace.
Had gained their souls so high and bright a place.
This pious artifice soon found success --
Of buds and blossoms strewed her way with flowers.
The knight unwearied listened; till at last,
He too described the glories of his past;
Tourney, and joust, and pageant bright and fair,
And all the lovely ladies who were there.
But half incredulous she heard. Could this--
This be the world? this place of love and bliss!
Where, then, was hid the strange and hideous charm.
That never failed to bring the gazer harm?
She crossed herself, yet asked, and listened still,
And still the knight described with all his skill,
The glorious world of joy, all joys above,
Transfigured in the golden mist of love.
Spread, spread your wings, ye angel guardians bright,
And shield these dazzling phantoms from her sight!
But no; days passed, matins and vespers rang,
And still the quiet nuns toiled, prayed, and sang,
And never guessed the fatal, coiling net
That every day drew near, and nearer yet.
Around their darling; for she went and came
About her duties, outwardly the same.
The same? ah, no! even when she knelt to pray,
Some charmed dream kept all her heart away.
So days went on, until the convent gate
Opened one night. Who durst go forth so late?
Across the moonlit grass, with stealthy tread,
Two silent, shrouded figures passed and fled.
And all was silent, save the moaning seas,
That sobbed and pleaded, and a wailing breeze
That sighed among the perfumed hawthorn trees.

What need to tell that dream so bright and brief,
Of joy unchequered by a dread of grief?
What need to tell how all such dreams must fade,
Before the slow foreboding, dreaded shade,
That floated nearer, until pomp and pride,
Pleasure and wealth, were summoned to her side,
To bid, at least, the noisy hours forget,
And clamour down the whispers of regret.
Still Angela strove to dream, and strove in vain;
Awakened once, she could not sleep again.
She saw, each day and hour, more worthless grown
The heart for which she cast away her own;
And her soul learnt, through bitterest inward strife,
The slight, frail love for which she wrecked her life,
The phantom for which all her hope was given,
The cold bleak earth for which she bartered heaven!
But all in vain; what chance remained? what heart
Would stoop to take so poor an outcast's part?

Years fled, and she grew reckless more and more,
Until the humblest peasant closed his door,
And where she passed, fair dames, in scorn and pride,
Shuddered, and drew their rustling robes aside.
At last a yearning seemed to fill her soul,
A longing that was stronger than control:
Once more, just once again, to see the place
That knew her young and innocent; to retrace
The long and weary southern path; to gaze
Upon the haven of her childish days;
Once more beneath the convent roof to lie;
Once more to look upon her home--and die!
Weary and worn--her comrades, chill remorse
And black despair, yet a strange silent force
Within her heart, that drew her more and more--
Onward she crawled, and begged from door to door.
Weighed down with weary days, her failing strength
Grew less each hour, till one day's dawn at length,
As its first rays flooded the world with light,
Showed the broad waters, glittering blue and bright,
And where, amid the leafy hawthorn wood,
Just as of old the low white convent stood.
Would any know her? Nay, no fear. Her face
Had lost all trace of youth, of joy, of grace,
Of the pure happy soul they used to know--
The novice Angela--so long ago.
She rang the convent bell. The well-known sound
Smote on her heart, and bowed her to the ground.
And she, who had not wept for long dry years,
Felt the strange rush of unaccustomed tears;
Terror and anguish seemed to check her breath,
And stop her heart O God! could this be death?
Crouching against the iron gate, she laid
Her weary head against the bars, and prayed:
But nearer footsteps drew, then seemed to wait;
And then she heard the opening of the grate,

And saw the withered face, on which awoke
Pity and sorrow, as the portress spoke,
And asked the stranger's bidding: "Take me in,"
She faltered, "Sister Monica, from sin,
And sorrow, and despair, that will not cease;
Oh take me in, and let me die in peace!"
With soothing words the sister bade her wait,
Until she brought the key to unbar the gate.
The beggar tried to thank her as she lay,
And heard the echoing footsteps die away.
But what soft voice was that which sounded near,
And stirred strange trouble in her heart to hear?
She raised her head; she saw--she seemed to know
A face that came from long, long years ago:
Herself; yet not as when she fled away,
The young and blooming Novice, fair and gay,
But a grave woman, gentle and serene:
The outcast knew it--what she might have been.
But as she gazed and gazed, a radiance bright
Filled all the place with strange and sudden light;
The nun was there no longer, but instead,
A figure with a circle round its head,
A ring of glory; and a face, so meek,
So soft, so tender.... Angela strove to speak,
And stretched her hands out, crying, "Mary mild,
Mother of mercy, help me!--help your child!"
And Mary answered, "From thy bitter past,
Welcome, my child! oh, welcome home at last!
I filled thy place. Thy flight is known to none,
For all thy daily duties I have done;
Gathered thy flowers, and prayed, and sang, and slept;
Didst thou not know, poor child, thy place was kept?
Kind hearts are here; yet would the tenderest one
Have limits to its mercy: God has none.
And man's forgiveness may be true and sweet,
But yet he stoops to give it. More complete
Is love that lays forgiveness at thy feet,
And pleads with thee to raise it. Only Heaven
Means crowned, not vanquished, when it says 'Forgiven!'"
Back hurried Sister Monica; but where
Was the poor beggar she left lying there?
Gone; and she searched in vain, and sought the place
For that wan woman, with the piteous face:
But only Angela at the gateway stood,
Laden with hawthorn blossoms from the wood.


And never did a day pass by again,
But the old portress, with a sigh of pain,
Would sorrow for her loitering: with a prayer
That the poor beggar, in her wild despair,
Might not have come to any ill; and when
She ended, "God forgive her!" humbly then
Did Angela bow her head, and say "Amen !"
How pitiful her heart was! all could trace
Something that dimmed the brightness of her face
After that day, which none had seen before;
Not trouble--but a shadow--nothing more.

Years passed away. Then, one dark day of dread,
Saw all the sisters kneeling round a bed,
Where Angela lay dying; every breath
Struggling beneath the heavy hand of death.
But suddenly a flush lit up her cheek,
She raised her wan right hand, and strove to speak.
In sorrowing love they listened; not a sound
Or sigh disturbed the utter silence round;
The very taper's flames were scarcely stirred,
In such hushed awe the sisters knelt and heard.
And thro' that silence Angela told her life:
Her sin, her flight; the sorrow and the strife,
And the return; and then, clear, low, and calm,
"Praise God for me, my sisters;" and the psalm
Rang up to heaven, far, and clear, and wide,
Again and yet again, then sank and died;
While her white face had such a smile of peace,
They saw she never heard the music cease;
And weeping sisters laid her in her tomb,
Crowned with a wreath of perfumed hawthorn bloom.


And thus the legend ended. It may be
Something is hidden in the mystery,
Besides the lesson of God's pardon, shown
Never enough believed, or asked, or known.
Have we not all, amid life's petty strife,
Some pure ideal of a noble life
That once seemed possible? Did we not hear
The flutter of its wings, and feel it near,
And just within our reach? It was. And yet
We lost it in this daily jar and fret,
And now live idle in a vague regret;
But still our place is kept, and it will wait,
Ready for us to fill it, soon or late.
No star is ever lost we once have seen,
We always may be what we might have been
Since good, tho' only thought, has life and breath,
God's life--can always be redeemed from death;
And evil, in its nature, is decay,
And any hour can blot it all away;
The hopes that, lost, in some far distance seem,
May be the truer life, and this the dream.



THE GHOST IN THE CUPBOARD ROOM

MR. BEAVER, on being "spoke" (as his friend and
ally, Jack Governor, called it), turned out of an
imaginary hammock with the greatest promptitude,
and went straight on duty. "As it's Nat Beaver's
watch," said he, "there shall be no skulking."
Jack looked at me, with an expectant and admiring
turn of his eye on Mr. Beaver, full of
complimentary implication. I noticed, by the way,
that Jack, in a naval absence of mind with which
he is greatly troubled at times, had his arm round
my sister's waist. Perhaps this complaint
originates in an old nautical requirement of
having something to hold on by.

These were the terms of Mr. Beaver's revelation to us:

What I have got to put forward, will not
take very long; and I shall beg leave to begin
by going back to last night--just about the time
when we all parted from one another to go to
bed.

The members of this good company did a very
necessary and customary thing, last night--they
each took a bedroom candlestick, and lit the
candle before they went up-stairs. I wonder
whether any one of them noticed that I left my
candlestick untouched, and my candle unlighted;
and went to bed, in a Haunted House, of all
the places in the world, in the dark? I don't
think any one of them did.

That is, perhaps, rather curious to begin
with. It is likewise curious, and just as
true, that the bare sight of those candlesticks
in the hands of this good company set me
in a tremble, and made last night, a night's
bad dream instead of a night's good sleep. The
fact of the matter is--and I give you leave,
ladies and gentlemen, to laugh at it as much as
you please that the ghost which haunted me
last night, which has haunted me off and on for
many years past, and which will go on haunting
me till I am a ghost myself (and consequently
spirit-proof in all respects), is, nothing more or
less than--a bedroom candlestick.

Yes, a bedroom candlestick and candle, or a
flat candlestick and candle--put it which way you
like--that is what haunts me. I wish it was
something pleasanter and more out of the
common way; a beautiful lady, or a mine of gold
and silver, or a cellar of wine and a coach and
horses, and such-like. But, being what it is,
I must take it for what it is, and make the best
of it--and I shall thank you all kindly if you
will help me out by doing the same.

I am not a scholar myself; but I make bold
to believe that the haunting of any man, with
anything under the sun, begins with the frightening
of him. At any rate, the haunting of me
with a bedroom candlestick and candle began
with the frightening of me with a bedroom
candlestick and candle--the frightening of me half
out of my life, ladies and gentlemen; and, for the
time being, the frightening of me altogether out
of my wits. That is not a very pleasant thing to
confess to you all, before stating the particulars;
but perhaps you will be the readier to believe
that I am not a downright coward, because you
find me bold enough to make a clean breast of it
already, to my own great disadvantage, so far.

These are the particulars, as well as I can
put them.

I was apprenticed to the sea when I was
about as tall as my own walking-stick; and I
made good enough use of my time to be fit for
a mate's berth at the age of twenty-five years.

It was in the year eighteen hundred and
eighteen, or nineteen, I am not quite certain
which, that I reached the before-mentioned age
of twenty-five. You will please to excuse my
memory not being very good for dates, names,
numbers, places, and such-like. No fear,
though, about the particulars I have
undertaken to tell you of; I have got them all
ship-shape in my recollection; I can see them,
at this moment, as clear as noonday in my
own mind. But there is a mist over what
went before, and, for the matter of that, a mist
likewise over much that came after--and it's
not very likely to lift, at my time of life, is it?

Well, in eighteen hundred and eighteen, or
nineteen, when there was peace in our part of
the world--and not before it was wanted, you
will say--there was fighting, of a certain
scampering, scrambling kind, going on in that old
fighting ground, which we seafaring men know
by the name of the Spanish Main. The possessions
that belonged to the Spaniards in South America
had broken into open mutiny and declared for
themselves years before. There was plenty of
bloodshed between the new government and
the old; but the new had got the best of it, for
the most part, under one General Bolivar--a
famous man in his time, though he seems to
have dropped out of people's memories now.
Englishmen and Irishmen with a turn for fighting,
and nothing particular to do at home, joined
the general as volunteers; and some of our
merchants here found it a good venture to send
supplies across the ocean to the popular side.
There was risk enough, of course, in doing this;
but where one speculation of the kind succeeded,
it made up for two, at the least, that failed. And
that's the true principle of trade, wherever I
have met with it, all the world over.

Among the Englishmen who were concerned
in this Spanish-American business, I, your
humble servant, happened, in a small way, to be
one. I was then mate of a brig belonging to
a certain firm in the City, which drove a sort of
general trade, mostly in queer out-of-the-way
places, as far from home as possible; and which
freighted the brig, in the year I am speaking of,
with a cargo of gunpowder for General Bolivar
and his volunteers. Nobody knew anything
about our instructions, when we sailed, except
the captain; and he didn't half seem to like
them. I can't rightly say how many barrels of
powder we had on board, or how much each
barrel held--I only know we had no other cargo.
The name of the brig was The Good Intent--a
queer name enough, you will tell me, for a
vessel laden with gunpowder, and sent to help
a revolution. And as far as this particular
voyage was concerned, so it was. I meant that
for a joke, ladies and gentlemen, and I'm sorry
to find you don't laugh at it.

The Good Intent was the craziest old tub of
a vessel I ever went to sea in, and the worst
found in all respects. She was two hundred
and thirty, or two hundred and eighty tons burden,
I forget which; and she had a crew of eight, all
told--nothing like as many as we ought by
rights to have had to work the brig. However,
we were well and honestly paid our wages; and
we had to set that against the chance of foundering
at sea, and, on this occasion, likewise, the
chance of being blown up into the bargain. In
consideration of the nature of our cargo, we were
harassed with new regulations which we didn't
at all like, relative to smoking our pipes and
lighting our lanterns; and, as usual in such
cases, the captain who made the regulations
preached what he didn't practise. Not a man
of us was allowed to have a bit of lighted candle
in his hand when he went below--except the
skipper; and he used his light, when he turned
in, or when he looked over his charts on the
cabin table, just as usual. This light was a
common kitchen candle or "dip," of the sort
that goes eight or ten to the pound; and it
stood in an old battered flat candlestick, with all
the japan worn and melted off, and all the tin
showing through. It would have been more
seamanlike and suitable in every respect if he
had had a lamp or a lantern; but he stuck to
his old candlestick; and that same old candlestick,
ladies and gentlemen, has ever afterwards
stuck to me. That's another joke, if you please;
and I'm much obliged to Miss Belinda in the
corner for being good enough to laugh at it.

Well (I said "well" before, but it's a word
that helps a man on like), we sailed in the brig, and
shaped our course, first, for the Virgin Islands,
in the West Indies; and, after sighting them,
we made for the Leeward Islands next; and
then stood on due south, till the look-out at the
mast-head hailed the deck, and said he saw land.
That land was the coast of South America. We
had had a wonderful voyage so far. We had
lost none of our spars or sails, and not a man of
us had been harassed to death at the pumps. It
wasn't often The Good Intent made such a
voyage as that, I can tell you.

I was sent aloft to make sure about the land,
and I did make sure of it. When I reported the
same to the skipper, he went below, and had a
look at his letter of instructions and the chart.
When he came on deck again, he altered our
course a trifle to the eastward--I forget the
point on the compass, but that don't matter.
What I do remember is, that it was dark before
we closed in with the land. We kept the lead
going, and hove the brig to in from four to five
fathoms water, or it might be six--I can't say for
certain. I kept a sharp eye to the drift of the
vessel, none of us knowing how the currents ran
on that coast. We all wondered why the
skipper didn't anchor; but he said, No, he must
first show a light at the foretop-mast-head, and
wait for an answering light on shore. We did
wait, and nothing of the sort appeared. It was
starlight and calm. What little wind there was
came in puffs off the land. I suppose we waited,
drifting a little to the westward, as I made it
out, best part of an hour before anything
happened--and then, instead of seeing the light on
shore, we saw a boat coming towards us, rowed
by two men only.

We hailed them, and they answered, "Friends!"
and hailed us by our name. They came on
board. One of them was an Irishman, and the
other was a coffee-coloured native pilot, who
jabbered a little English. The Irishman handed
a note to our skipper, who showed it to me. It
informed us that the part of the coast we were
off then, was not over safe for discharging our
cargo, seeing that spies of the enemy (that is to
say, of the old government) had been taken and
shot in the neighbourhood the day before. We
might trust the brig to the native pilot; and he
had his instructions to take us to another part
of the coast. The note was signed by the
proper parties; so we let the Irishman go back
alone in the boat, and allowed the pilot to
exercise his lawful authority over the brig. He kept
us stretching off from the land till noon the next
day--his instructions, seemingly, ordering him
to keep us well out of sight of the shore. We
only altered our course, in the afternoon, so as
to close in with the land again a little before
midnight.

This same pilot was about as ill-looking a
vagabond as ever I saw; a skinny, cowardly,
quarrelsome mongrel, who swore at the men, in
the vilest broken English, till they were every
one of them ready to pitch him overboard.
The skipper kept them quiet, and I kept them
quiet, for the pilot being given us by our
instructions, we were bound to make the best
of him. Near nightfall, however, with the best
will in the world to avoid it, I was unlucky
enough to quarrel with him. He wanted to go
below with his pipe, and I stopped him, of
course, because it was contrary to orders. Upon
that, he tried to hustle by me, and I put him
away with my hand. I never meant to push
him down; but, somehow, I did. Ho picked
himself up as quick as lightning, and pulled out
his knife. I snatched it out of his hand, slapped
his murderous face for him, and threw his
weapon overboard. He gave me one ugly look,
and walked aft. I didn't think much of the
look then; but I remembered it a little too well
afterwards.

We were close in with the land again, just as
the wind failed us, between eleven and twelve
that night; and dropped our anchor by the pilot's
directions. It was pitch dark, and a dead,
airless calm. The skipper was on deck with two
of our best men for watch. The rest were
below, except the pilot, who coiled himself up,
more like a snake than a man, on the forecastle.
It was not my watch till four in the morning.
But I didn't like the look of the night, or the
pilot, or the state of things generally, and I
shook myself down on deck to get my nap there,
and be ready for anything at a moment's notice.
The last I remember was the skipper whispering
to me that he didn't like the look of things
either, and that he would go below and consult
his instructions again. That is the last I
remember, before the slow, heavy, regular roll of
the old brig on the ground swell rocked me off
to sleep.

I was woke, ladies and gentlemen, by a scuffle
on the forecastle, and a gag in my mouth.
There was a man on my breast and a man on my
legs; and I was bound hand and foot in half a
minute. The brig was in the hands of the
Spaniards. They were swarming all over her.
I heard six heavy splashes in the water, one
after another--I saw the captain stabbed to the
heart as he came running up the companion--
and I heard a seventh splash in the water.
Except myself, every soul of us on board had been
murdered and thrown into the sea. Why I was
left, I couldn't think, till I saw the pilot stoop
over me with a lantern, and look, to make sure
of who I was. There was a devilish grin on his
face, and he nodded his head at me, as much as
to say, You were the man who hustled me down
and slapped my face, and I mean to play the
game of cat and mouse with you in return
for it!

I could neither move nor speak; but I could
see the Spaniards take off the main hatch and
rig the purchases for getting up the cargo. A
quarter of an hour afterwards, I heard the
sweeps of a schooner, or other small vessel, in
the water. The strange craft was laid alongside
of us; and the Spaniards set to work to
discharge our cargo into her. They all worked
hard except the pilot; and he came, from time
to time, with his lantern, to have another
look at me, and to grin and nod always in the
same devilish way. I am old enough now not
to be ashamed of confessing the truth; and
I don't mind acknowledging that the pilot
frightened me.

The fright, and the bonds, and the gag, and
the not being able to stir hand or foot, had
pretty nigh worn me out, by the time the
Spaniards gave over work. This was just as the
dawn broke. They had shifted good part of our
cargo on board their vessel, but nothing like all
of it; and they were sharp enough to be off with
what they had got, before daylight. I need
hardly say that I had made up my mind, by this
time, to the worst I could think of. The pilot,
it was clear enough, was one of the spies of the
enemy, who had wormed himself into the confidence
of our consignees without being suspected.
He, or more likely his employers, had got
knowledge enough of us to suspect what our cargo
was; we had been anchored for the night in the
safest berth for them to surprise us in; and we
had paid the penalty of having a small crew,
and consequently an insufficient watch. All
this was clear enough--but what did the pilot
mean to do with me?

On the word of a man, it makes my flesh
creep, now, only to tell you what he did with
me.

After all the rest of them were out of the
brig, except the pilot and two Spanish seamen,
these last took me up, bound and gagged as I
was, lowered me into the hold of the vessel, and
laid me along on the floor; lashing me to it with
ropes' ends, so that I could just turn from one
side to the other, but could not roll myself fairly
over, so as to change my place. They then left
me. Both of them were the worse for liquor;
but the devil of a pilot was sober--mind that!--
as sober as I am at the present moment.

I lay in the dark for a little while, with my
heart thumping as if it was going to jump out
of me. I lay about five minutes so, when the
pilot came down into the hold, alone. He had
the captain's cursed flat candlestick and a
carpenter's awl in one hand, and a long thin twist
of cotton yarn, well oiled, in the other. He put
the candlestick, with a new "dip" lighted in it,
down on the floor, about two feet from my face,
and close against the side of the vessel. The
light was feeble enough; but it was sufficient to
show a dozen barrels of gunpowder or more, left
all round me in the hold of the brig. I began
to suspect what he was after, the moment I
noticed the barrels. The horrors laid hold of
me from head to foot; and the sweat poured off
my face like water.

I saw him go, next, to one of the barrels of
powder standing against the side of the vessel,
in a line with the candle, and about three feet,
or rather better, away from it. He bored a hole
in the side of the barrel with his awl; and the
horrid powder came trickling out, as black as
hell, and dripped into the hollow of his hand,
which he held to catch it. When he had got a
good handful, he stopped up the hole by
jamming one end of his oiled twist of cotton-yarn
fast into it; and he then rubbed the powder into
the whole length of the yarn, till he had
blackened every hairsbreadth of it. The next
thing he did--as true as I sit here, as true as the
heaven above us all--the next thing he did was
to carry the free end of his long, lean, black,
frightful slow-match to the lighted candle along-side
my face, and to tie it, in several folds, round
the tallow dip, about a third of the distance
down, measuring from the flame of the wick to
the lip of the candlestick. He did that; he
looked to see that my lashings were all safe;
and then he put his face down close to mine; and
whispered in my ear, "Blow up with the brig!"


He was on deck again the moment after; and
he and the two others shoved the hatch on over
me. At the farthest end from where I lay, they
had not fitted it down quite true, and I saw a
blink of daylight glimmering in when I looked
in that direction. I heard the sweeps of the
schooner fall into the water--splash! splash!
fainter and fainter, as they swept the vessel out
in the dead calm, to be ready for the wind in
the offing. Fainter and fainter, splash! splash!
for a quarter of an hour or more.

While those sounds were in my ears, my eyes
were fixed on the candle. It had been freshly
lit--if left to itself it would burn for between
six and seven hours--the slow-match was twisted
round it about a third of the way down--and
therefore the flame would be about two hours
reaching it. There I lay, gagged, bound, lashed
to the floor; seeing my own life burning down
with the candle by my side--there I lay, alone
on the sea, doomed to be blown to atoms, and
to see that doom drawing on, nearer and nearer
with every fresh second of time, through nigh
on two hours to come; powerless to help myself
and speechless to call for help to others. The
wonder to me is that I didn't cheat the flame,
the slow-match, and the powder, and die of the
horror of my situation before my first half-hour
was out in the hold of the brig.

I can't exactly say how long I kept the
command of my senses after I had ceased to hear
the splash of the schooner's sweeps in the water.
I can trace back everything I did and everything
I thought, up to a certain point; but, once past
that, I get all abroad, and lose myself in my
memory now, much as I lost myself in my own
feelings at the time.

The moment the hatch was covered over me,
I began, as every other man would have begun
in my place, with a frantic effort to free my
hands. In the mad panic I was in, I cut my
flesh with the lashings as if they had been knife-blades;
but I never stirred them. There was
less chance still of freeing my legs, or of tearing
myself from the fastenings that held me to the
floor. I gave in, when I was all but suffocated
for want of breath. The gag, you will please
to remember, was a terrible enemy to me; I
could only breathe freely through my nose--and
that is but a poor vent when a man is straining
his strength as far as ever it will go.

I gave in, and lay quiet, and got my breath
again; my eyes glaring and straining at the
candle all the time. While I was staring at it,
the notion struck me of trying to blow out the
flame by pumping a long breath at it suddenly
through my nostrils. It was too high above me,
and too far away from me, to be reached in that
fashion. I tried, and tried, and tried--and then
I gave in again and lay quiet again; always with
my eyes glaring at the candle and the candle
glaring at me. The splash of the schooner's
sweeps was very faint by this time. I could
only just hear them in the morning stillness.
Splash! splash!--fainter and fainter--splash!
splash!

Without exactly feeling my mind going, I
began to feel it getting queer, as early as this:
The snuff of the candle was growing taller and
taller, and the length of tallow between the
flame and the slow-match, which was the length
of my life, was getting shorter and shorter. I
calculated that I had rather less than an hour
and a half to live. An hour and a half! Was
there a chance, in that time, of a boat pulling off
to the brig from shore? Whether the land
near which the vessel was anchored was in
possession of our side, or in possession of the
enemy's side, I made it out that they must,
sooner or later, send to hail the brig, merely
because she was a stranger in those parts. The
question for me was, how soon? The sun had
not risen yet, as I could tell by looking through
the chink in the hatch. There was no coast
village near us, as we all knew, before the brig
was seized, by seeing no lights on shore. There
was no wind, as I could tell by listening, to
bring any strange vessel near. If I had had six
hours to live, there might have been a chance
for me, reckoning from sunrise to noon. But
with an hour and a half, which had dwindled to
an hour and a quarter by this time--or, in other
words, with the earliness of the morning, the
uninhabited coast, and the dead calm all against
me--there was not the ghost of a chance. As
I felt that, I had another struggle--the last--
with my bonds; and only cut myself the deeper
for my pains.

I gave in once more, and lay quiet, and
listened for the splash of the sweeps. Gone!
Not a sound could I hear but the blowing of a
fish, now and then, on the surface of the sea, and
the creak of the brig's crazy old spars, as she
rolled gently from side to side with the little
swell there was on the quiet water.

An hour and a quarter. The wick grew
terribly, as the quarter slipped away; and the
charred top of it began to thicken and spread
out mushroom-shape. It would fall off soon.
Would it fall off red-hot, and would the swing
of the brig cant it over the side of the candle
and let it down on the slow-match? If it would,
I had about ten minutes to live instead of an
hour. This discovery set my mind for a minute
on a new tack altogether. I began to ponder
with myself what sort of a death blowing-up
might be. Painful? Well, it would be, surely,
too sudden for that. Perhaps just one crash,
inside me, or outside me, or both, and nothing
more? Perhaps not even a crash; that and
death and the scattering of this living body of
mine into millions of fiery sparks, might all
happen in the same instant? I couldn't make
it out; I couldn't settle how it would be. The
minute of calmness in my mind left it, before I
had half done thinking; and I got all abroad
again.

When I came back to my thoughts, or when
they came back to me (I can't say which), the
wick was awfully tall, the flame was burning
with a smoke above it, the charred top was broad
and red, and heavily spreading out to its fall.
My despair and horror at seeing it, took me in
a new way, which was good and right, at any
rate, for my poor soul. I tried to pray; in my
own heart, you will understand, for the gag put
all lip-praying out of my power. I tried, but
the candle seemed to burn it up in me. I
struggled hard to force my eyes from the slow,
murdering flame, and to look up through the
chink in the hatch at the blessed daylight. I
tried once, tried twice; and gave it up. I tried
next only to shut my eyes, and keep them shut
--once--twice and the second time I did it.
"God bless old mother, and sister Lizzie; God
keep them both, and forgive me." That was all
I had time to say, in my own heart, before my
eyes opened again, in spite of me, and the flame
of the candle flew into them, flew all over me,
and burnt up the rest of my thoughts in an
instant.

I couldn't hear the fish blowing now; I
couldn't hear the creak of the spars; I couldn't
think; I couldn't feel the sweat of my own
death agony on my face--I could only look at
the heavy, charred top of the wick. It swelled,
tottered, bent over to one side, dropped--red
hot at the moment of its fall--black and harmless,
even before the swing of the brig had
canted it over into the bottom of the candle-stick.

I caught myself laughing. Yes! laughing at
the safe fall of the bit of wick. But for the
gag I should have screamed with laughing. As
it was, I shook with it inside me--shook till the
blood was in my head, and I was all but
suffocated for want of breath. I had just sense
enough left to feel that my own horrid laughter,
at that awful moment, was a sign of my brain
going at last. I had just sense enough left to
make another struggle before my mind broke
loose like a frightened horse, and ran away with
me.

One comforting look at the blink of daylight
through the hatch was what I tried for once
more. The fight to force my eyes from the
candle and to get that one look at the
daylight, was the hardest I had had yet; and
I lost the fight. The flame had hold of my
eyes as fast as the lashings had hold of my
hands. I couldn't look away from it. I
couldn't even shut my eyes, when I tried that
next, for the second time. There was the wick,
growing tall once more. There was the space
of unburnt candle between the light and the
slow match shortened to an inch or less. How
much life did that inch leave me? Three-quarters
of an hour? Half an hour? Fifty minutes
Twenty minutes? Steady! an inch of tallow
candle would burn longer than twenty minutes.
An inch of tallow! the notion of a man's
body and soul being kept together by an inch of
tallow! Wonderful! Why, the greatest king
that sits on a throne can't keep a man's body
and soul together; and here's an inch of tallow
that can do what the king can't! There's
something to tell mother, when I get home, which
will surprise her more than all the rest of my
voyages put together. I laughed inwardly,
again, at the thought of that; and shook and
swelled and suffocated myself, till the light of
the candle leaped in through my eyes, and
licked up the laughter, and burnt it out of me,
and made me all empty, and cold, and quiet
once more.

Mother and Lizzie. I don't know when they
came back; but they did come back--not, as it
seemed to me, into my mind this time; but
right down bodily before me, in the hold of the
brig.

Yes: sure enough, there was Lizzie, just as light-hearted
as usual, laughing at me. Laughing! Well
why not? Who is to blame Lizzie for thinking
I'm lying on my back, drunk in the cellar, with
the beer barrels all round me? Steady! she's
crying now--spinning round and round in a
fiery mist, wringing her hands, screeching out
for help--fainter and fainter, like the splash of
the schooner's sweeps. Gone!--burnt up in
the fiery mist. Mist? fire? no: neither one
nor the other. It's mother makes the light--
mother knitting, with ten flaming points at the
ends of her fingers and thumbs, and slow-matches
hanging in bunches all round her face
instead of her own grey hair. Mother in her
old arm-chair, and the pilot's long skinny hands
hanging over the back of the chair, dripping
with gunpowder. No! no gunpowder, no chair,
no mother--nothing but the pilot's face, shining
red hot, like a sun, in the fiery mist; turning
upside down in the fiery mist; running
backwards and forwards along the slow-match, in
the fiery mist; spinning millions of miles in a
minute, in the fiery mist--spinning itself smaller
and smaller into one tiny point, and that
point darting on a sudden straight into my
head--and then, all fire and all mist--no
hearing, no seeing, no thinking, no feeling
--the brig, the sea, my own self, the whole
world, all gone together!

After what I've just told you, I know
nothing and remember nothing, till I woke up,
as it seemed to me in a comfortable bed, with
two rough and ready men like myself sitting
on each side of my pillow, and a gentleman
standing watching me at the foot of the bed.
It was about seven in the morning. My sleep
(or what seemed like my sleep to me) had
lasted better than eight months--I was among
my own countrymen in the island of Trinidad
--the men at each side of my pillow were my
keepers, turn and turn about--and the gentleman
standing at the foot of the bed was the
doctor. What I said and did in those eight
months, I never have known and never shall.
I woke out of it, as if it had been one long sleep
--that's all I know.

It was another two months or more before
the doctor thought it safe to answer the
questions I asked him.

The brig had been anchored, just as I had
supposed, off a part of the coast which was lonely
enough to make the Spaniards pretty sure of no
interruption, so long as they managed their
murderous work quietly under cover of night.
My life had not been saved from the shore, but
from the sea. An American vessel, becalmed in
the offing, had made out the brig as the sun
rose; and the captain, having his time on his
hands in consequence of the calm, and seeing
a vessel anchored where no vessel had any reason
to be, had manned one of his boats and sent
his mate with it, to look a little closer into the
matter, and bring back a report of what he saw.
What he saw, when he and his men found the
brig deserted and boarded her, was a gleam of
candlelight through the chink in the hatchway.
The flame was within about a thread's breadth
of the slow-match, when he lowered himself into
the hold; and if he had not had the sense and
coolness to cut the match in two with his knife,
before he touched the candle, he and his men
might have been blown up along with the brig,
as well as me. The match caught and turned
into sputtering red fire, in the very act of
putting the candle out; and if the communication
with the powder barrel had not been cut off,
the Lord only knows what might have
happened.

What became of the Spanish schooner and
the pilot I have never heard from that day to
this. As for the brig, the Yankees took her, as
they took me, to Trinidad, and claimed their
salvage, and got it, I hope, for their own sakes.
I was landed just in the same state as when
they rescued me from the brig, that is to say,
clean out of my senses. But, please to remember
it was a long time ago; and, take my word
for it, I was discharged cured, as I have told
you. Bless your hearts, I'm all right now, as
you may see. I'm a little shaken by telling the
story, ladies and gentlemen--a little shaken,
that's all.


THE GHOST IN MASTER B'S ROOM

IT being now my own turn, I "took the word"
as the French say, and went on:

When I established myself in the triangular
garret which had gained so distinguished a
reputation, my thoughts naturally turned to
Master B. My speculations about him were
uneasy and manifold. Whether his Christian
name was Benjamin, Bissextile (from his having
been born in Leap Year), Bartholomew, or Bill.
Whether the initial letter belonged to his family
name, and that was Baxter, Black, Brown, Barker,
Buggins, Baker, or Bird. Whether he was a
foundling, and had been baptized B. Whether
he was a lion-hearted boy, and B. was short for
Briton, or for Bull. Whether he could possibly
have been kith and kin to an illustrious lady who
brightened my own childhood, and had come of
the blood of the brilliant Mother Bunch?

With these profitless meditations I tormented
myself much. I also carried the mysterious
letter into the appearance and pursuits of the
deceased; wondering whether he dressed in Blue,
wore Boots (he couldn't have been Bald), was
a boy of Brains, liked Books, was good at
Bowling, had any skill as a Boxer, ever in his
Buoyant Boyhood Bathed from a Bathing-machine
at Bognor, Bangor, Bournemouth,
Brighton, or Broadstairs, like a Bounding
Billiard Ball?

So, from the first, I was haunted by the letter B.

It was not long before I remarked that I never
by any hazard had a dream of Master B., or of
anything belonging to him. But, the instant I
awoke from sleep, at whatever hour of the night,
my thoughts took him up, and roamed away,
trying to attach his initial letter to something
that would fit it and keep it quiet.

For six nights, I had been worried thus in
Master B.'s room, when I began to perceive that
things were going wrong.

The first appearance that presented itself was
early in the morning, when it was but just
daylight and no more. I was standing shaving at
my glass, when I suddenly discovered, to my
consternation and amazement, that I was shaving
--not myself--I am fifty--but a boy. Apparently
Master B.?

I trembled and looked over my shoulder;
nothing there. I looked again in the glass, and
distinctly saw the features and expression of a
boy, who was shaving, not to get rid of a beard,
but to get one. Extremely troubled in my mind,
I took a few turns in the room, and went back
to the looking-glass, resolved to steady my hand
and complete the operation in which I had been
disturbed. Opening my eyes, which I had shut
while recovering my firmness, I now met in the
glass, looking straight at me, the eyes of a young
man of four or five and twenty. Terrified by this
new ghost, I closed my eyes, and made a strong
effort to recover myself. Opening them again, I
saw, shaving his cheek in the glass, my father,
who has long been dead. Nay, I even saw my
grandfather too, whom I never did see in my life.

Although naturally much affected by these
remarkable visitations, I determined to keep my
secret, until the time agreed upon for the present
general disclosure. Agitated by a multitude of
curious thoughts, I retired to my room, that
night, prepared to encounter some new
experience of a spectral character. Nor was my
preparation needless, for, waking from an uneasy
sleep at exactly two o'clock in the morning,
what were my feelings to find that I was sharing
my bed, with the skeleton of Master B.!

I sprang up, and the skeleton sprang up also.
I then heard a plaintive voice saying, "Where
am I? What is become of me?" and, looking
hard in that direction, perceived the ghost of
Master B.

The young spectre was dressed in an obsolete
fashion: or rather, was not so much dressed as put
into a case of inferior pepper-and-salt cloth, made
horrible by means of shining buttons. I observed
that these buttons went, in a double row, over
each shoulder of the young ghost, and appeared
to descend his back. He wore a frill round his
neck. His right hand (which I distinctly
noticed to be inky) was laid upon his stomach;
connecting this action with some feeble
pimples on his countenance, and his general air of
nausea, I concluded this ghost to be the ghost
of a boy who had habitually taken a great deal
too much medicine.

"Where am I?" said the little spectre, in a
pathetic voice. "And why was I born in the
Calomel days, and why did I have all that
Calomel given me?"

I replied, with sincere earnestness, that upon
my soul I couldn't tell him.

"Where is my little sister," said the ghost,
"and where my angelic little wife, and where is
the boy I went to school with?"

I entreated the phantom to be comforted, and
above all things to take heart respecting the loss
of the boy he went to school with. I
represented to him that probably that boy never did,
within human experience, come out well, when
discovered. I urged that I myself had, in later
life, turned up several boys whom I went to
school with, and none of them had at all
answered. I expressed my humble belief that that
boy never did answer. I represented that he was
a mythic character, a delusion, and a snare. I
recounted how, the last time I found him, I
found him at a dinner party behind a wall of
white cravat, with an inconclusive opinion on
every possible subject, and a power of silent
boredom absolutely Titanic. I related how, on
the strength of our having been together at
"Old Doylance's," he had asked himself to breakfast
with me (a social offence of the largest
magnitude); how, fanning my weak embers of
belief in Doylance's boys, I had let him in; and
how, he had proved to be a fearful wanderer about
the earth, pursuing the race of Adam with
inexplicable notions concerning the currency, and
with a proposition that the Bank of England
should, on pain of being abolished, instantly
strike off and circulate, God knows how many
thousand millions of ten-and-sixpenny notes.

The ghost heard me in silence, and with a
fixed stare. "Barber!" it apostrophised me
when I had finished.

"Barber?" I repeated--for I am not of that
profession.

"Condemned," said the ghost, "to shave a
constant change of customers--now, me--now, a
young man--now, thyself as thou art--now, thy
father--now, thy grandfather; condemned, too,
to lie down with a skeleton every night, and to
rise with it every morning--"

(I shuddered on hearing this dismal announce
ment).

"Barber! Pursue me!"

I had felt, even before the words were
uttered, that I was under a spell to pursue the
phantom. I immediately did so, and was in
Master B.'s room no longer.

Most people know what long and fatiguing
night journeys had been forced upon the witches
who used to confess, and who, no doubt, told the
exact truth--particularly as they were always
assisted with leading questions, and the Torture
was always ready. I asseverate that, during my
occupation of Master B.'s room, I was taken by
the ghost that haunted it, on expeditions fully
as long and wild as any of those. Assuredly, I
was presented to no shabby old man with a
goat's horns and tail (something between Pan
and an old clothesman), holding conventional
receptions, as stupid as those of real life and less
decent; but, I came upon other things which
appeared to me to have more meaning.

Confident that I speak the truth and shall be
believed, I declare without hesitation that I
followed the ghost, in the first instance on a broom-stick,
and afterwards on a rocking-horse. The
very smell of the animal's paint--especially when
I brought it out, by making him warm--I am
ready to swear to. I followed the ghost, afterwards,
in a hackney coach; an institution with
the peculiar smell of which, the present generation
is unacquainted, but to which I am again
ready to swear as a combination of stable, dog
with the mange, and very old bellows. (In this,
I appeal to previous generations to confirm or
refute me.) I pursued the phantom, on a headless
donkey: at least, upon a donkey who was so
interested in the state of his stomach that his
head was always down there, investigating it;
on ponies, expressly born to kick up behind;
on roundabouts and swings, from fairs; in the
first cab--another forgotten institution where the
fare regularly got into bed, and was tucked up
with the driver.

Not to trouble you with a detailed account of
all my travels in pursuit of the ghost of Master
B., which were longer and more wonderful than
those of Sindbad the Sailor, I will confine myself to
one experience from which you may judge of many.

I was marvellously changed. I was myself,
yet not myself. I was conscious of something
within me, which has been the same all through
my life, and which I have always recognised
under all its phases and varieties as never altering,
and yet I was not the I who had gone to
bed in Master B.'s room. I had the smoothest
of faces and the shortest of legs, and I had
taken another creature like myself, also with the
smoothest of faces and the shortest of legs,
behind a door, and was confiding to him a
proposition of the most astounding nature.

This proposition was, that we should have a
Seraglio.

The other creature assented warmly. He had
no notion of respectability, neither had I. It
was the custom of the East, it was the way of
the good Caliph Haroun Alraschid (let me have
the corrupted name again for once, it is so
scented with sweet memories!), the usage was
highly laudable, and most worthy of imitation.
"Oh, yes! Let us," said the other creature with
a jump, "have a Seraglio."

It was not because we entertained the faintest
doubts of the meritorious character of the
Oriental establishment we proposed to import,
that we perceived it must be kept a secret from
Miss Griffin. It was because we knew Miss
Griffin to be bereft of human sympathies, and
incapable of appreciating the greatness of the great
Haroun. Mystery impenetrably shrouded from
Miss Griffin then, let us entrust it to Miss Bule.

We were ten in Miss Griffin's establishment
by Hampstead Ponds; eight ladies and two
gentlemen. Miss Bule, whom I judge to have
attained the ripe age of eight or nine, took the
lead in society. I opened the subject to her in the
course of the day, and proposed that she should
become the Favourite.

Miss Bule, after struggling with the diffidence
so natural to, and charming in, her adorable sex,
expressed herself as flattered by the idea, but
wished to know how it was proposed to
provide for Miss Pipson? Miss Bule--who
was understood to have vowed towards that
young lady, a friendship, halves, and no secrets,
until death, on the Church Service and Lessons
complete in two volumes with case and
lock--Miss Bule said she could not, as the
friend of Pipson, disguise from herself, or me,
that Pipson was not one of the common.

Now, Miss Pipson, having curly light hair
and blue eyes (which was my idea of anything
mortal and feminine that was called Fair), I
promptly replied that I regarded Miss Pipson in
the light of a Fair Circassian.

"And what then?" Miss Bule pensively
asked.

I replied that she must be inveigled by a Merchant,
brought to me veiled, and purchased as a
slave.

[The other creature had already fallen into
the second male place in the State, and was set
apart for Grand Vizier. He afterwards resisted
this disposal of events, but had his hair pulled
until he yielded].

"Shall I not be jealous?" Miss Bule
inquired, casting down her eyes.

"Zobeide, no," I replied; "you will ever be
the favourite Sultana; the first place in my heart,
and on my throne, will be ever yours."

Miss Bule, upon that assurance, consented to
propound the idea to her seven beautiful
companions. It occurring to me, in the course of
the same day, that we knew we could trust a
grinning and good-natured soul called Tabby,
who was the serving drudge of the house, and had
no more figure than one of the beds, and upon
whose face there was always more or less blacklead,
I slipped into Miss Bule's hand after supper,
a little note to that effect: dwelling on the blacklead
as being in a manner deposited by the finger
of Providence, pointing Tabby out for Mesrour,
the celebrated chief of the Blacks of the Hareem.

There were difficulties in the formation of the
desired institution, as there are in all combinations.
The other creature showed himself of a
low character, and, when defeated in aspiring
to the throne, pretended to have conscientious
scruples about prostrating himself before the
Caliph; wouldn't call him Commander of the
Faithful; spoke of him slightingly and
inconsistently as a mere "chap;" said he, the other
creature, "wouldn't play"--Play!--and was
otherwise coarse and offensive. This meanness of
disposition was, however, put down by the
general indignation of an united Seraglio, and I
became blessed in the smiles of eight of the
fairest of the daughters of men.

The smiles could only be bestowed when Miss
Griffin was looking another way, and only then
in a very wary manner, for there was a legend
among the followers of the Prophet that she saw
with a little round ornament in the middle of
the pattern on the back of her shawl. But,
every day after dinner, for an hour, we were all
together, and then the Favourite and the rest of
the Royal Hareem competed who should most
beguile the leisure of the Serene Haroun
reposing from the cares of State--which were
generally, as in most affairs of State, of an
Arithmetical character, the Commander of the
Faithful being a fearful boggler at a sum.

On these occasions, the devoted Mesrour,
chief of the Blacks of the Hareem, was always in
attendance (Miss Griffin usually ringing for that
officer, at the same time, with great vehemence),
but never acquitted himself in a manner
worthy of his historical reputation. In the first
place, his bringing a broom into the Divan of
the Caliph, even when Haroun wore on his
shoulders the red robe of anger (Miss Pipson's
pelisse), though it might be got over for the
moment, was never to be quite satisfactorily
accounted for. In the second place, his breaking
out into grinning exclamations of "Lork
you pretties!" was neither Eastern nor respectful.
In the third place, when specially instructed
to say "Bismillah!" he always said
"Hallelujah!" This officer, unlike his class, was
too good-humoured altogether, kept hls mouth
open far too wide, expressed approbation to an
incongruous extent, and even once--it was on the
occasion of the purchase of the Fair Circassian
for five hundred thousand purses of gold, and
cheap, too--embraced the Slave, the Favourite,
and the Caliph, all round. (Parenthetically let
me say God bless Mesrour, and may there have
been sons and daughters on that tender bosom,
softening many a hard day since !)

Miss Griffin was a model of propriety, and
I am at a loss to imagine what the feelings of
the virtuous woman would have been, if she had
known, when she paraded us down the
Hampstead-road two and two, that she was walking
with a stately step at the head of Polygamy
and Mahomedanism. I believe that a
mysterious and terrible joy with which the
contemplation of Miss Griffin, in this unconscious state,
inspired us, and a grim sense prevalent among
us that there was a dreadful power in our
knowledge of what Miss Griffin (who knew all
things that could be learnt out of book) didn't
know, were the mainspring of the preservation
of our secret. It was wonderfully kept, but was
once upon the verge of self-betrayal. The
danger and escape occurred upon a Sunday.
We were all ten ranged in a conspicuous part
of the gallery at church, with Miss Griffin at
our head--as we were every Sunday--
advertising the establishment in an unsecular sort of
way--when the description of Solomon in his
domestic glory, happened to be read. The
moment that monarch was thus referred to,
conscience whispered me, "Thou, too, Haroun!"
The officiating minister had a cast in his eye,
and it assisted conscience by giving him the
appearance of reading personally at me. A crimson
blush, attended by a fearful perspiration,
suffused my features. The Grand Vizier became
more dead than alive, and the whole Seraglio
reddened as if the sunset of Bagdad shone direct
upon their lovely faces. At this portentous
time the awful Griffin rose, and balefully
surveyed the children of Islam. My own impression
was, that Church and State had entered into
a conspiracy with Miss Griffin to expose us, and
that we should all be put into white sheets, and
exhibited in the centre aisle. But, so Westerly
--if I may be allowed the expression as opposite
to Eastern associations--was Miss Griffin's
sense of rectitude, that she merely suspected
Apples, and we were saved.

I have called the Seraglio, united. Upon the
question, solely, whether the Commander of the
Faithful durst exercise a right of kissing in that
sanctuary of the palace, were its peerless
inmates divided. Zobeide asserted a counter-right
in the Favourite to scratch, and the fair Circassian
put her face, for refuge, into a green
baize bag, originally designed for books. On
the other hand, a young antelope of transcendant
beauty from the fruitful plains of Camden-town
(whence she had been brought, by traders,
in the half-yearly caravan that crossed the
intermediate desert after the holidays), held more
liberal opinions, but stipulated for limiting the
benefit of them to that dog, and son of a dog,
the Grand Vizier--who had no rights, and was
not in question. At length, the difficulty was
compromised by the installation of a very youthful
slave as Deputy. She, raised upon a stool,
officially received upon her cheeks the salutes
intended by tbe gracious Haroun for other
Sultanas, and was privately rewarded from the
coffers of the Ladies of the Hareem.

And now it was, at the full height of enjoyment
of my bliss, that I became heavily troubled.
I began to think of my mother, and what she
would say to my taking home at Midsummer
eight of the most beautiful of the daughters of
men, but all unexpected. I thought of the
number of beds we made up at our house, of
my father's income, and of the baker, and my
despondency redoubled. The Seraglio and
malicious Vizier, divining the cause of their Lord's
unhappiness, did their utmost to augment it.
They professed unbounded fidelity, and declared
that they would live and die with him.
Reduced to the utmost wretchedness by these
protestations of attachment, I lay awake, for hours
at a time, ruminating on my frightful lot. In
my despair, I think I might have taken, an early
opportunity of falling on my knees before Miss
Griffin, avowing my resemblance to Solomon,
and praying to be dealt with according to the
outraged laws of my country, if an unthought-of
means of escape had not opened before me.

One day, we were out walking, two and two--
on which occasion the Vizier had his usual
instructions to take note of the boy at the turnpike,
and if he profanely gazed (which he always
did) at the beauties of the Hareem, to have him
bowstrung in the course of the night--and it
happened that our hearts were veiled in gloom.
An unaccountable action on the part of the antelope
had plunged the State into disgrace. That
charmer, on the representation that the previous
day was her birthday, and that vast treasures had
been sent in a hamper for its celebration (both
baseless assertions), had secretly but most
pressingly invited thirty-five neighbouring princes
and princesses to a ball and supper: with a
special stipulation that they were "not to be
fetched till twelve." This wandering of the
antelope's fancy, led to the surprising arrival at Miss
Griffin's door, in divers equipages and under
various escorts, of a great company in full dress,
who were deposited on the top step in a flush of
high expectancy, and who were dismissed in
tears. At the beginning of the double knocks
attendant on these ceremonies, the antelope had
retired to a back attic, and bolted herself in;
and at every new arrival, Miss Griffin had gone
so much more and more distracted, that at last
she had been seen to tear her front. Ultimate
capitulation on the part of the offender, had been
followed by solitude in the linen-closet, bread
and water, and a lecture to all, of vindictive
length, in which Miss Griffin had used the expressions:
Firstly, "I believe you all of you knew of
it;" Secondly, "Every one of you is as wicked as
another;" Thirdly, "A pack of little wretches."

Under these circumstances, we were walking
drearily along; and I especially, with my
Moosulmaun responsibilities heavy on me, was
in a very low state of mind; when a strange man
accosted Miss Griffin, and, after walking on at
her side for a little while and talking with her,
looked at me. Supposing him to be a minion
of the law, and that my hour was come, I
instantly ran away, with a general purpose of
making for Egypt.

The whole Seraglio cried out, when they saw
me making off as fast as my legs would carry
me (I had an impression that the first turning
on the left, and round by the public-house,
would be the shortest way to the Pyramids),
Miss Griffin screamed after me, the faithless
Vizier ran after me, and the boy at the turnpike
dodged me into a corner, like a sheep, and cut
me off. Nobody scolded me when I was taken
and brought back; Miss Griffin only said, with a
stunning gentleness, This was very curious! Why
had I run away when the gentleman looked at me?

If I had had any breath to answer with, I
dare say I should have made no answer; having
no breath, I certainly made none. Miss
Griffin and the strange man took me between
them, and walked me back to the palace in a
sort of state; but not at all (as I couldn't help
feeling, with astonishment), in culprit state.

When we got there, we went into a room by
ourselves, and Miss Griffin called in to her assistance,
Mesrour, chief of the dusky guards of the
Hareem. Mesrour, on being whispered to,
began to shed tears.

"Bless you, my precious!" said that officer,
turning to me; "your Pa's took bitter bad!"

I asked, with a fluttered heart, "Is he very ill?"

"Lord temper the wind to you, my lamb!"
said the good Mesrour, kneeling down, that I
might have a comforting shoulder for my head
to rest on, "your Pa's dead!"

Haroun Alraschid took to flight at the words;
the Seraglio vanished; from that moment, I
never again saw one of the eight of the fairest
of the daughters of men.

I was taken home, and there was Debt at
home as well as Death, and we had a sale there.
My own little bed was so superciliously looked
upon by a Power unknown to me, hazily called
"The Trade," that a brass coal-scuttle, a
roasting-jack, and a birdcage, were obliged to be put
into it to make a Lot of it, and then it went for
a song. So I heard mentioned, and I wondered
what song, and thought what a dismal song it
must have been to sing!

Then, I was sent to a great, cold, bare, school
of big boys; where everything to eat and wear
was thick and clumpy, without being enough;
where everybody, large and small, was cruel;
where the boys knew all about the sale, before I
got there, and asked me what I had fetched, and
who had bought me, and hooted at me, "Going,
going, gone!" I never whispered in that
wretched place that I had been Haroun, or had
had a Seraglio: for, I knew that if I mentioned
my reverses, I should be so worried, that I should
have to drown myself in the muddy pond near
the playground, which looked like the beer.

Ah me, ah me! No other ghost has haunted
the boy's room, my friends, since I have occupied
it, than the ghost of my own childhood, the
ghost of my own innocence, the ghost of my
own airy belief. Many a time have I
pursued the phantom: never with this man's stride
of mine to come up with it, never with these
man's hands of mine to touch it, never more
to this man's heart of mine to hold it in
its purity. And here you see me working
out, as cheerfully and thankfully as I may, my
doom of shaving in the glass a constant change
of customers, and of lying down and rising up
with the skeleton allotted to me for my mortal
companion.



THE GHOST IN THE GARDEN ROOM

MY friend and solicitor rubbed his bald
forehead--which is quite Shakespearian--with his
hand, after a manner he has when I consult him
professionally, and took a very large pinch of
snuff. "My bedroom," said he, "has been haunted
by the Ghost of a Judge."

"Of a Judge?" said all the company.

"Of a Judge. In his wig and robes as he sits upon
the Bench, at Assize-time. As I have lingered in
the great white chair at the side of my fire, when
we have all retired for the night to our
respective rooms, I have seen and heard him. I
never shall forget the description he gave me, and
I never have forgotten it since I first heard it."

"Then you have seen and heard him before, Mr.
Undery?" said my sister.

"Often."

"Consequently, he is not peculiar to this house?"

"By no means. He returns to me in many intervals
of quiet leisure, and his story haunts me."

We one and all called for the story, that it might
haunt us likewise.

"It fell within the range of his judicial
experience," said my friend and solicitor, "and
this was the Judge's manner of summing it up."

Those words did not apply, of course, to the great
pinch of snuff that followed them, but to the
words that followed the great pinch of snuff. They
were these:

Not many years after the beginning of this
century, a worthy couple of the name of Huntroyd
occupied a small farm in the North Riding
of Yorkshire. They had married late in life,
although they were very young when they first
began to "keep company" with each other.
Nathan Huntroyd had been farm servant to Hester
Rose's father, and had made up to her at a time
when her parents thought she might do better;
and so, without much consultation of her feelings,
they had dismissed Nathan in somewhat
cavalier fashion. He had drifted far away from
his former connexions, when an uncle of his
died, leaving Nathan--by this time upwards of
forty years of age--enough money to stock a
small farm, and yet to have something over to
put in the bank against bad times. One of
the consequences of this bequest was that
Nathan was looking out for a wife and
housekeeper in a kind or discreet and leisurely way,
when, one day, he heard that his old love, Hester,
was--not married and flourishing, as he had
always supposed her to be--but a poor maid-of-all-work,
in the town of Ripon. For her father
had had a succession of misfortunes, which had
brought him in his old age to the workhouse;
her mother was dead; her only brother
struggling to bring up a large family; and Hester
herself, a hard-working, homely-looking (at
thirty-seven) servant. Nathan had a kind of
growling satisfaction (which only lasted for a
minute or two, however) in hearing of these
turns of Fortune's wheel. He did not make many
intelligible remarks to his informant, and to no
one else did he say a word. But, a few days afterwards,
he presented himself, dressed in his Sunday
best, at Mrs. Thompson's back door in Ripon.

Hester stood there in answer to the good
sound knock his good sound oak stick made;
she with the light full upon her, he in shadow.
For a moment there was silence. He was
scanning the face and figure of his old love, for
twenty years unseen. The comely beauty of
youth had faded away entirely; she was, as I
have said, homely-looking, plain-featured, but
with a clean skin, and pleasant, frank eyes.
Her figure was no longer round, but tidily
draped in a blue and white bedgown, tied round
her waist by her white apron-strings, and her
short red linsey petticoat showed her tidy feet
and ankles. Her former lover fell into no
ecstasies. He simply said to himself, "She'll
do;" and forthwith began upon his business.

"Hester, thou dost not mind me. I am
Nathan, as thy father turned off at a minute's
notice, for thinking of thee for a wife, twenty
year come Michaelmas next. I have not thought
much upon matrimony since. But Uncle Ben
has died, leaving me a small matter in the bank;
and I have taken Nab-end Farm, and put in a
bit of stock, and shall want a missus to see after
it. Wilt like to come? I'll not mislead thee.
It's dairy, and it might have been arable. But
arable takes more horses than it suited me to
buy, and I'd the offer of a tidy lot of kine.
That's all. If thou'lt have me, I'll come for
thee as soon as the hay is gotten in."

Hester only said, "Come in, and sit thee
down."

He came in, and sat down. For a time she
took no more notice of him than of his stick,
bustling about to get dinner ready for the family
whom she served. He meanwhile watched her
brisk, sharp movements, and repeated to himself,
"She'll do!" After about twenty minutes of
silence thus employed, he got up, saying:

"Well, Hester, I'm going. When shall I
come back again?"

"Please thysel', and thou'lt please me," said
Hester, in a tone that she tried to make light
and indifferent; but he saw that her colour came
and went, and that she trembled while she
moved about. In another moment Hester was
soundly kissed; but when she looked round to
scold the middle-aged farmer, he appeared so
entirely composed that she hesitated. He said:

"I have pleased mysel', and thee too, I
hope. Is it a month's wage, and a month's
warning? To-day is the eighth. July eighth
is our wedding-day. I have no time to spend
a-wooing before then, and wedding must na
take long. Two days is enough to throw away
at our time o' life."

It was like a dream; but Hester resolved
not to think more about it till her work was
done. And when all was cleaned up for the
evening, she went and gave her mistress warning,
telling her all the history of her life in a
very few words. That day month she was
married from Mrs. Thompson's house.

The issue of the marriage was one boy, Benjamin.
A few years after his birth, Hester's
brother died at Leeds, leaving ten or twelve
children. Hester sorrowed bitterly over this
loss; and Nathan showed her much quiet
sympathy, although he could not but remember that
Jack Rose had added insult to the bitterness of
his youth. He helped his wife to make ready to
go by the waggon to Leeds. He made light of
the household difficulties which came thronging
into her mind after all was fixed for her departure.
He filled her purse, that she might have
wherewithal to alleviate the immediate wants
of her brother's family. And as she was
leaving, he ran after the waggon. "Stop, stop!"
he cried. "Hetty, if thou wilt--if it wunnot be
too much for thee--bring back one of Jack's
wenches for company, like. We've enough and
to spare; and a lass will make the house
winsome, as a man may say."

The waggon moved on, while Hester had such
a silent swelling of gratitude in her heart, as
was both thanks to her husband, and thanksgiving
to God.

And that was the way that little Bessy Rose
came to be an inmate of the Nab's-end farm.

Virtue met with its own reward in this
instance, and in a clear and tangible shape, too,
which need not delude people in general into
thinking that such is the usual nature of virtue's
rewards. Bessy grew up a bright, affectionate,
active girl; a daily comfort to her uncle and
aunt. She was so much a darling in the household
that they even thought her worthy of their
only son Benjamin, who was perfection in their
eyes. It is not often the case that two plain,
homely people have a child of uncommon beauty;
but it is sometimes, and Benjamin Huntroyd
was one of these exceptional cases. The hard-working,
labour and care-marked farmer, and
the mother, who could never have been more
than tolerably comely in her best days, produced
a son who might have been an earl's son for
grace and beauty. Even the hunting squires of
the neighbourhood reined up their horses to
admire him, as he opened the gates for them.
He had no shyness, he was so accustomed to
admiration from strangers, and adoration from
his parents from his earliest years. As for
Bessy Rose, he ruled imperiously over her heart
from the time she first set eyes on him. And
as she grew older, she grew on in loving,
persuading herself that what her uncle and
aunt loved so dearly it was her duty to love
dearest of all. At every unconscious symptom
of the young girl's love for her cousin,
his parents smiled and winked: all was going
on as they wished, no need to go far afield for
Benjamin's wife. The household could go on
as it was now; Nathan and Hester sinking into
the rest of years, and relinquishing care and authority
to those dear ones, who, in process of time,
might bring other dear ones to share their love.

But Benjamin took it all very coolly. He had
been sent to a day-school in the neighbouring
town--a grammar-school, in the high state of
neglect in which the majority of such schools
were thirty years ago. Neither his father nor
his mother knew much of learning. All that
they knew (and that directed their choice of a
school) was, that they could not, by any
possibility, part with their darling to a boarding-school;
that some schooling he must have, and
that Squire Pollard's son went to Highminster
Grammar School. Squire Pollard's son, and many
another son destined to make his parents' hearts
ache, went to this school. If it had not been so
utterly bad a place of education, the simple
farmer and his wife might have found it out
sooner. But not only did the pupils there learn
vice, they also learnt deceit. Benjamin was
naturally too clever to remain a dunce, or else, if he had
chosen so to be, there was nothing in Highminster
Grammar School to hinder his being a dunce of
the first water. But to all appearance he grew
clever and gentlemanlike. His father and
mother were even proud of his airs and graces
when he came home for the holidays; taking
them for proofs of his refinement, although the
practical effect of such refinement was to make
him express his contempt for his parents' homely
ways and simple ignorance. By the time he was
eighteen--an articled clerk in an attorney's office
at Highminster, for he had quite declined becoming
a "mere clod-hopper," that is to say a hard-working,
honest farmer like his father--Bessy Rose
was the only person who was dissatisfied with
him. The little girl of fourteen instinctively
felt there was something wrong about him.
Alas! two years more, and the girl of sixteen
worshipped his very shadow, and would not
see that aught could be wrong with one so soft-spoken,
so handsome, so kind as Cousin
Benjamin. For Benjamin had found out that the
way to cajole his parents out of money for every
indulgence he fancied, was to pretend to forward
their innocent scheme, and make love to his
pretty cousin Bessy Rose. He cared just
enough for her to make this work of necessity
not disagreeable at the time he was performing
it. But he found it tiresome to remember her
little claims upon him when she was no longer
present. The letters he had promised her during
his weekly absences at Highminster, the trifling
commissions she had asked him to do for her, were
all considered in the light of troubles; and even
when he was with her he resented the inquiries
she made as to his mode of passing his time, or
what female acquaintances he had in Highminster.

When his apprenticeship was ended, nothing
would serve him but that he must go up to
London for a year or two. Poor Farmer Huntroyd
was beginning to repent of his ambition of
making his son Benjamin a gentleman. But it
was too late to repine now. Both father
and mother felt this, and, however sorrowful
they might be, they were silent, neither
demurring nor assenting to Benjamin's
proposition when first he made it. But Bessy,
through her tears, noticed that both her uncle
and aunt seemed unusually tired that night,
and sat hand-in-hand on the fireside settle,
idly gazing into the bright flames as if they
saw in it pictures of what they had once
hoped their lives would have been. Bessy
rattled about among the supper things as she
put them away after Benjamin's departure,
making more noise than usual--as if noise and
bustle was what she needed to keep her from
bursting out crying--and, having at one keen
glance taken in the position and looks of Nathan
and Hester, she avoided looking in that direction
again, for fear the sight of their wistful faces
should make her own tears overflow.

"Sit thee down lass--sit thee down. Bring
the creepie-stool to the fire side, and let's have
a bit of talk over the lad's plans," said Nathan
at last, rousing himself to speak. Bessy came
and sat down in front of the fire, and threw
her apron over her face, as she rested her head
on both hands. Nathan felt as if it was a
chance which of the two women burst out crying
first. So he thought he would speak, in
hopes of keeping off the infection of tears.

"Didst ever hear of this mad plan afore,
Bessy?"

"No, never!" Her voice came muffled, and
changed from under her apron. Hester felt as
if the tone, both of question and answer, implied
blame, and this she could not bear.

"We should ha' looked to it when we bound
him, for of necessity it would ha' come to this.
There's examins, and catechizes, and I dunno
what all for him to be put through in London.
It's not his fault."

"Which on us said it were?" asked Nathan,
rather put out. "Thof, for that matter, a few
weeks would carry him over the mire, and make
him as good a lawyer as any judge among 'em.
Oud Lawson the attorney told me that, in a
talk I had wi' him a bit sin. Na, na! it's the lad's
own hankering after London that makes him
want for to stay there for a year, let alone two."

Nathan shook his head.

"And if it be his own hankering," said Bessy,
putting down her apron, her face all aflame, and
her eyes swollen up, "I dunnot see harm in it.
Lads aren't like lasses, to be teed to their own
fireside like th' crook yonder. It's fitting for a
young man to go abroad, and see the world afore
he settles down."

Hester's hand sought Bessy's, and the two
women sat in sympathetic defiance of any blame
that should be thrown on the beloved absent.
Nathan only said:

"Nay, wench, dunna wax up so; whatten's
done, 's done; and worse, it's my doing. I mun
needs make my bairn a gentleman; and we mun
pay for it."

"Dear uncle! he wunna spend much, I'll
answer for it; and I'll scrimp and save i' th'
house to make it good."

"Wench!" said Nathan, solemnly, "it were
not paying in cash I were speaking on: it were
paying in heart's care, and heaviness of soul.
Lunnon is a place where the devil keeps court
as well as King George; and my poor chap has
more nor once welly fallen into his clutches
here. I dunno what he'll do when he gets close
within sniff of him."

"Don't let him go, father!" said Hester, for
the first time taking this view. Hitherto she had
only thought of her own grief at parting with
him. "Father, if you think so, keep him here,
safe under our own eye."

"Nay!" said Nathan, "he's past time o' life
for that. Why, there's not one on us knows where
he is at this present time, and he not gone out
of our sight an hour. He's too big to be put
back i' th' go-cart, mother, or kept within doors
with the chair turned bottom upwards."

"I wish he were a wee bairn lying in my arms
again. It were a sore day when I weaned him;
and I think life's been getten sorer and sorer at
every turn he's ta'en towards manhood."

"Coom, lass, that's noan the way to be talking.
Be thankful to Marcy that thou'st getten
a man for the son as stands five foot eleven
in's stockings, and ne'er a sick piece about him.
We wunnot grudge him his fling, will we, Bess,
my wench. He'll be coming back in a year, or
mebby a bit more; and be a' for settling in a
quiet town like, wi' a wife that's noan so fur
fra' me at this very minute. An' we oud folk,
as we get into years, must gi' up farm, and tak
a bit on a house near Lawyer Benjamin."

And so the good Nathan, his own heart heavy
enough, tried to soothe his womenkind. But, of
the three, his eyes were longest in closing; his
apprehensions the deepest founded.

"I misdoubt me I hanna done well by th' lad.
I misdoubt me sore," was the thought that kept
him awake till day began to dawn. "Summet's
wrong about him, or folk would na look at me
wi' such piteous-like een when they speak on
him. I can see th' meaning of it, thof I'm too
proud to let on. And Lawson, too, he holds
his tongue more nor he should do, when I ax
him how my lad's getting on, and whatten sort
of a lawyer he'll mak. God be marciful to
Hester an' me, if th' lad's gone away! God be
marciful! But mebby it's this lying waking a'
the night through, that maks me so fearfu'.
Why, when I were his age, I daur be bound I
should ha' spent money fast enoof, i' I could ha'
come by it. But I had to arn it; that maks a
great differ'. Well! It were hard to thwart
th' child of our old age, and we waiten so long
for to have 'un !"

Next morning Nathan rode Moggy the cart
horse into Highminster to see Mr. Lawson.
Anybody who saw him ride out of his own
yard would have been struck with the change
in him which, when he returned; a change,
more than a day's unusual exercise should
have made in a man of his years. He
scarcely held the reins at all. One jerk of
Moggy's head would have plucked them out of
his hands. His head was bent forward, his eyes
looking on some unseen thing, with long
unwinking gaze. But as he drew near home on
his return, he made an effort to recover himself.

"No need fretting them," he said; "lads will
be lads. But I didna think he had it in him to
be so thowtless; young as he is. Well, well! he'll
mebby get more wisdom i' Lunnon. Anyways
it's best to cut him off fra such evil lads as Will
Hawker, and such-like. It's they as have led
my boy astray. He were a good chap till he
knowed them--a good chap till he knowed them."

But he put all his cares in the background
when he came into the houseplace, where both
Bessy and his wife met him at the door, and both
would fain lend a hand to take off his great-coat.

"Theer, wenches, theer! ye might let a man
alone for to get out on's clothes! Why, I might
ha' struck thee, lass." And he went on talking,
trying to keep them off for a time from the subject
that all had at heart. But there was no putting
them off for ever; and, by dint of repeated
questioning on his wife's part, more was got out
than he had ever meant to tell--enough to grieve
both his hearers sorely; and yet the brave old
man still kept the worst in his own breast.

The next day Benjamin came home for a week
or two before making his great start to London.
His father kept him at a distance, and was
solemn and quiet in his manner to the young
man. Bessy, who had shown anger enough at
first, and had uttered many a sharp speech,
began to relent, and then to feel hurt and
displeased that her uncle should persevere so long
in his cold, reserved manner, and Benjamin just
going to leave them. Her aunt went,
tremblingly busy, about the clothes-presses and
drawers, as if afraid of letting herself think
either of the past or the future; only once or
twice, coming behind her son, she suddenly
stooped over his sitting figure, and kissed his
cheek, and stroked his hair. Bessy remembered
afterwards--long years afterwards--how he had
tossed his head away with nervous irritability
on one of these occasions, and had muttered--
her aunt did not hear it, but Bessy did--

"Can't you leave a man alone?"

Towards Bessy herself he was pretty
gracious. No other words express his manner: it
was not warm, nor tender, nor cousinly, but
there was an assumption of underbred politeness
towards her as a young, pretty woman; which
politeness was neglected in his authoritative or
grumbling manner towards his mother, or his
sullen silence before his father. He once or
twice ventured on a compliment to Bessy on her
personal appearance. She stood still, and looked
at him with astonishment.

"How's my eyes changed sin last thou sawst
them," she asked, "that thou must be telling me
about 'em i' that fashion? I'd rayther by a deal
see thee helping the mother when she's dropped
her knitting-needle and canna see i' th' dusk for
to pick it up."

But Bessy thought of his pretty speech about
her eyes long after he had forgotten making it,
and would have been puzzled to tell the colour
of them. Many a day, after he was gone, did
she look earnestly in the little oblong looking-glass,
which hung up against the wall of her
little sleeping-chamber, but which she used to
take down in order to examine the eyes he had
praised, murmuring to herself, "Pretty soft
grey eyes! Pretty soft grey eyes!" until she
would hang up the glass again with a sudden
laugh and a rosy blush.

In the days, when he had gone away to the
vague distance and vaguer place--the city called
London--Bessy tried to forget all that had gone
against her feeling of the affection and duty
that a son owed to his parents; and she had
many things to forget of this kind that would
keep surging up into her mind. For instance,
she wished that he had not objected to the
home-spun, home-made shirts which his mother
and she had had such pleasure in getting ready
for him. He might not know, it was true--
and so her love urged--how carefully and evenly
the thread had been spun: how, content with
bleaching the yarn in the sunniest meadow,
the linen, on its return from the weaver's, had
been spread out afresh on the sweet summer
grass, and watered carefully night after night
when there was no dew to perform the kindly
office. He did not know--for no one but Bessy
herself did--how many false or large stitches,
made large and false by her aunt's failing eyes
(who yet liked to do the choicest part of the
stitching all by herself), Bessy had unpicked at
night in her own room, and with dainty fingers
had restitched; sewing eagerly in the dead of
night. All this he did not know; or he could
never have complained of the coarse texture;
the old-fashioned make of these shirts; and urged
on his mother to give him part of her little
store of egg and butter money in order to buy
newer-fashioned linen in Highminster.

When once that little precious store of his
mother's was discovered, it was well for Bessy's
peace of mind that she did not know how loosely
her aunt counted up the coins, mistaking
guineas for shillings, or just the other way, so
that the amount was seldom the same in the old
black spoutless teapot. Yet this son, this hope,
this love, had yet a strange power of fascination
over the household. The evening before he left,
he sat between his parents, a hand in theirs on
either side, and Bessy on the old creepie-stool,
her head lying on her aunt's knee, and looking
up at him from time to time, as if to learn his
face off by heart; till his glances meeting hers,
made her drop her eyes, and only sigh.

He stopped up late that night with his father,
long after the women had gone to bed. But
not to sleep; for I will answer for it the grey-haired
mother never slept a wink till the late
dawn of the autumn day, and Bessy heard her
uncle come up-stairs with heavy, deliberate
footsteps, and go to the old stocking which served
him for bank; and count out golden guineas--
once he stopped, but again he went on afresh,
as if resolved to crown his gift with liberality.
Another long pause--in which she could but
indistinctly hear continued words, it might have
been advice, it might be a prayer, for it was in
her uncle's voice; and then father and son came
up to bed. Bessy's room was but parted from
her cousin's by a thin wooden partition, and the
last sound she distinctly heard, before her eyes,
tired out with crying, closed themselves in sleep,
was the guineas clinking down upon each other
at regular intervals, as if Benjamin were playing
at pitch and toss with his father's present.

After he was gone, Bessy wished he had asked
her to walk part of the way with him into
Highminster. She was all ready, her things laid out
on the bed, but she could not accompany him
without invitation.

The little household tried to close over the
gap as best they might. They seemed to set
themselves to their daily work with unusual
vigour; but somehow when evening came, there
had been little done. Heavy hearts never make
light work, and there was no telling how much
care and anxiety each had had to bear in secret
in the field, at the wheel, or in the dairy.
Formerly he was looked for every Saturday;
looked for, though he might not come, or if he
came, there were things to be spoken about, that
made his visit anything but a pleasure: still he
might come, and all things might go right, and
then what sunshine, what gladness to those
humble people. But now he was away, and
dreary winter was come on; old folks' sight
fails, and the evenings were long, and sad, in
spite of all Bessy could do or say. And he did
not write so often as he might--so every one
thought; though every one would have been
ready to defend him from either of the others
who had expressed such a thought aloud.
"Surely!" said Bessy to herself, when the first
primroses peeped out in a sheltered and sunny
hedge bank, and she gathered them as she passed
home from afternoon church--"surely there
never will be such a dreary, miserable winter
again as this has been." There had been a
great change in Nathan and Bessy Huntroyd
during this last year. The spring before,
when Benjamin was yet the subject of more
hopes than fears, his father and mother
looked what I may call an elderly middle-aged
couple: people who had a good deal of
hearty work in them yet. Now--it was not
his absence alone that caused the change--they
looked frail and old, as if each day's natural
trouble was a burden more than they could bear.
For Nathan had heard sad reports about his
only child, and had told them solemnly to his
wife, as things too bad to be believed, and yet,
"God help us if indeed he is such a lad as this!"
Their eyes were become too dry and hollow for many
tears; they sat together, hand in hand; and shivered,
and sighed, and did not speak many words, or dare
to look at each other: and then Hester had said,

"We mauna tell th' lass. Young folks' hearts
break wi' a little, and she'd be apt to fancy it
were true." Here the old woman's voice broke
into a kind of piping cry, but she struggled, and
her next words were all right. "We mauna tell
her, he's bound to be fond on her, and mebby, if
she thinks well on him, and loves him, it will
bring him straight."

"God grant it!" said Nathan.

"God shall grant it," said Hester,
passionately moaning out her words; and then
repeating them, alas! with a vain repetition.

"It's a bad place for lying, is Highminster,"
said she, at length, as if impatient of the silence.
"I never knowed such a place for getting up
stories. But Bessy knows nought on, and
nother you nor me belie'es un; that's one
blessing."

But if they did not in their hearts believe
them, how came they to look so sad, and worn,
beyond what mere age could do?

Then came round another year, another
winter, yet more miserable than the last. This
year, with the primroses, came Benjamin; a
bad, hard, flipppant young man, with yet enough
of specious manners and handsome countenance
to make his appearance striking at first to those
to whom the aspect of a London fast young man
of the lowest order is strange and new. Just
at first, as he sauntered in with a swagger and
an air of indifference, which was partly assumed,
partly real, his old parents felt a simple kind of
awe of him, as if he were not their son, but a
real gentleman; but they had too much fine
instinct in their homely natures not to know,
after a very few minutes had passed, that this
was not a true prince.

"Whatten ever does he mean," said Hester
to her niece, as soon as they were alone, "by
a' them maks and wearlocks? And he minces
his words as if his tongue were clipped short,
or split like a magpie's. Hech! London is as
bad as a hot day i' August for spoiling good
flesh; for he were a good-looking lad when he
went up; and now, look at him, with his skin
gone into lines and flourishes, just like first page
on a copy-book!"

"I think he looks a deal better, aunt, for
them new-fashioned whiskers!" said Bessy,
blushing still at the remembrance of the kiss he
had given her on first seeing her--a pledge, she
thought, poor girl, that, in spite of his long silence
in letter-writing, he still looked upon her as his
troth-plight wife. There were things about him
which none of them liked, although they never
spoke about them, yet there was also something
to gratify them all in the way in which he
remained quiet at Nab-end, instead of seeking
variety, as he had formerly done, by constantly
stealing off to the neighbouring town. His
father had paid all the debts that he knew of,
soon after Benjamin had gone up to London;
so there were no duns that his parents knew of
to alarm him, and keep him at home. And he
went out in the morning with the old man, his
father, and lounged by his side, as Nathan went
round his fields, with busy yet infirm gait,
having heart, as he would have expressed it, in
all that was going on, because at length his son
seemed to take an interest in all the farming
affairs, and stood patiently by his side, while he
compared his own small galloways with the great
short-horns looming over his neighbour's hedge.

"It's a slovenly way, thou seest, that of selling
th' milk; folk don't care whether it's good or not,
so that they get their pint-measure full o' stuff
that's watered afore it leaves th' beast, instead
o' honest cheating by the help o' th' pump. But
look at Bessy's butter, what skill it shows!
part her own manner of making, and part good
choice o' cattle. It's a pleasure to see her
basket, a' packed ready for to go to market;
and it's noan o' a pleasure for to see the buckets
fu' of their blue starch-water as yon beasts give.
I'm thinking they crossed th' breed wi' a pump,
not long sin'. Hech! but our Bessy's a cleaver
canny wench! I sometimes think thou'lt be for
gi'ng up th' law, and taking to th' oud trade,
when thou wedst wi' her!" This was intended
to be a skilful way of ascertaining whether there
was any ground for the old farmer's wish and
prayer that Benjamin might give up the law, and
return to the primitive occupation of his father.
Nathan dared to hope it now, since his son had
never made much by his profession, owing, as
he had said, to his want of a connexion: and the
farm, and the stock, and the clean wife, too, were
ready to his hand; and Nathan could safely
rely on himself never in his most unguarded
moments, to reproach his son with the hardly-earned
hundreds that had been spent on his
education. So the old man listened with painful
interest to the answer which his son was
evidently struggling to make; coughing a little
and blowing his nose before he spoke.

"Well! you see, father, law is a precarious
livelihood; a man, as I may express myself, has
no chance in the profession unless he is known
--known to the judges, and tiptop barristers,
and that sort of thing. Now you see my
mother and you have no acquaintance that you
may call exactly in that line. But luckily I have
met with a man, a friend as I may say, who is
really a first-rate fellow, knowing everybody, from
the Lord Chancellor downwards; and he has
offered me a share in his business a partnership
in short--" He hesitated a little.

"I'm sure that's uncommon kind of the
gentleman," said Nathan. "I should like for to thank
him mysen; for it's not many as would pick up
a young chap out o' th' dirt as it were, and say,
'Here's hauf my good fortune for you, sir, and
your very good health.' Most on 'em, when
they're gettin' a bit o' luck, run off wi' it to
keep it a' to themselves, and gobble it down in
a corner. What may be his name, for I should
like for to know it?"

"You don't quite apprehend me, father. A
great deal of what you've said is true to the
letter. People don't like to share their good
luck, as you say."

"The more credit to them as does," broke in
Nathan.

"Ay, but you see even such a fine fellow as
my friend Cavendish does not like to give away
half his good practice for nothing. He expects
an equivalent."

"An equivalent," said Nathan: his voice had
dropped down an octave. "And what may that
be? There's always some meaning in grand
words, I take it, though I'm not book-larned
enough to find it out."

"Why, in this case the equivalent he demands
for taking me into partnership, and afterwards
relinquishing the whole business to me, is three
hundred pounds down."

Benjamin looked sideways from under his
eyes to see how his father took the proposition.
His father struck his stick deep down in the
ground, and leaning one hand upon it, faced
round at him.

"Then thy fine friend may go and be hanged.
Three hunder pound! I'll be darned an'
danged too, if I know where to get 'em, e'en if
I'd be making a fool o' thee an' mysen too."

He was out of breath by this time. His son
took his father's first words in dogged silence;
it was but the burst of surprise he had led
himself to expect, and did not daunt him for long.

"I should think, sir--"

"'Sir'--whatten for dost thou 'sir' me? Is
them's your manners? I'm plain Nathan
Huntroyd; who never took on to be a gentleman:
but I have paid my way up to this time, which I
shannot do much longer, if I'm to have a son
coming an' asking me for three hunder pounds, just
as if I were a cow, and had nothing to do but let
down my milk to the first person as strokes me."

"Well, father," said Benjamin, with an
affectation of frankness, "then there's nothing
for me but to do as I have often planned before;
go and emigrate."

"And what?" said his father, looking sharply
and steadily at him.

"Emigrate. Go to America, or India, or
some colony where there would be an opening
for a young man of spirit."

Benjamin had reserved this proposition for his
trump card, expecting by means of it to carry
all before him. But to his surprise his father
plucked his stick out of the hole he had made
when he so vehemently thrust it into the ground,
and walked on four or five steps in advance;
there he stood still again, and there was a dead
silence for a few minutes.

"It 'ud, mebby, be th' best thing thou couldst
do," the father began. Benjamin set his teeth
hard to keep in curses. It was well for poor
Nathan he did not look round then, and see the
look his son gave him. "But it would come
hard like upon us, upon Hester and me, for,
whether thou'rt a good 'un or not, thou'rt our
flesh and blood, our only bairn, and if thou'rt
not all as a man could wish it's mebby been the
fault on our pride i' thee. It 'ud kill the
missus if he went off to Amerikay, and Bess,
too, the lass as thinks so much on him." The
speech originally addressed to his son, had
wandered off into a monologue--as keenly listened
to by Benjamin, however, as if it had all been
spoken to him. After a pause of consideration
his father turned round. "Yon man--I wunnot
call him a friend o' yourn, to think of asking
you for such a mint o' money--is not th' only
one, I'll be bound, as could give ye a start i' th'
law? Other folks 'ud, mebby, do it for less?"

"Not one of 'em; to give me equal advantages,"
said Benjamin, thinking he perceived
signs of relenting.

"Well, then, thou mayst tell him that it's
neither he nor thee as 'll see th' sight o' three
hunder pound o' my money. I'll not deny as
I've a bit laid up again a rainy day; it's not so
much as thatten though, and a part on it is for
Bessy, as has been like a daughter to us."

"But Bessy is to be your real daughter some
day, when I've a home to take her to," said
Benjamin; for he played very fast and loose, even
in his own mind, with his engagement with
Bessy. Present with her, when she was looking
her brightest and best, he behaved to her as if
they were engaged lovers: absent from her, he
looked upon her rather as a good wedge, to be
driven into his parent's favour on his behalf.
Now, however, he was not exactly untrue in
speaking as if he meant to make her his wife; for
the thought was in his mind, though he made
use of it to work upon his father.

"It will be a dree day for us, then," said the
old man. "But God'll have us in his keeping,
and 'll mebby be taking more care on us i' heaven
by that time than Bess, good lass as she is, has
had on us at Nab-end. Her heart is set on
thee, too. But, lad, I hanna gotten the three
hunder; I keeps my cash i' th' stocking, thou
knowst, till it reaches fifty pound, and then I
takes it to Ripon Bank. Now the last scratch
they're gi'en me, made it just two hunder, and I
hanna but on to fifteen pound yet i' the stockin',
and I meant one hunder an' the red cow's calf
to be for Bess, she's ta'en such pleasure like i'
rearing it."

Benjamin gave a sharp glance at his father to
see if he was telling the truth; and, that a
suspicion of the old man, his father, had entered into
the son's head, tells enough of his own character.

"I canna do it--I canna do it, for sure--
although I shall like to think as I had helped
on the wedding. There's the black heifer to be
sold yet, and she'll fetch a matter of ten pound;
but a deal on't will be needed for seed-corn, for
the arable did but bad last year, and I thought I
would try--I'll tell thee what, lad! I'll make
it as though Bess lent thee her hunder, only
thou must give her a writ of hand for it, and thou
shalt have a' the money i' Ripon Bank, and see
if the lawyer wunnot let thee have a share of
what he offered thee for three hunder, for two.
I dunnot mean for to wrong him, but thou must
get a fair share for the money. At times I
think thou'rt done by folk; now, I wadna
have you cheat a bairn of a brass farthing: same
time I wadna have thee so soft as to be cheated."

To explain this, it should be told that some of
the bills which Benjamin had received money
from his father to pay, had been altered so as to
include other and less creditable expenses which
the young man had incurred; and the simple
old farmer, who had still much faith left in him
for his boy, was acute enough to perceive that
he had paid above the usual price for the articles
he had purchased.

After some hesitation, Benjamin agreed to
receive this two hundred, and promised to
employ it to the best advantage in setting
himself up in business. He had, nevertheless, a
strange hankering after the additional fifteen
pounds that was left to accumulate in the stocking.
It was his, he thought, as heir to his father,
and he soon lost some of his usual complaisance
for Bessy that evening, as he dwelt on the idea
that there was money being laid by for her, and
grudged it to her even in imagination. He thought
more of this fifteen pound that he was not to
have, than of all the hardly-earned and humbly-saved
two hundred that he was to come into
possession of. Meanwhile Nathan was in
unusual spirits that evening. He was so generous
and affectionate at heart that he had an
unconscious satisfaction in having helped two
people on the road to happiness by the sacrifice
of the greater part of his property. The very
fact of having trusted his son so largely, seemed
to make Benjamin more worthy of trust in his
father's estimation. The sole idea he tried to
banish was, that, if all came to pass as he hoped,
both Benjamin and Bessy would be settled far
away from Nab-end; but then he had a child-like
reliance that "God would take care of him
and his missus, somehow or anodder. It wur o'
no use looking too far ahead."

Bessy had to hear many unintelligible jokes
from her uncle that night; for he made no doubt
that Benjamin had told her all that had passed,
whereas the truth was, his son had said never
a word to his cousin on the subject.

When the old couple were in bed, Nathan
told his wife of the promise he had made
to his son, and the plan in life which the
advance of the two hundred was to
promote. Poor Hester was a little startled at
the sudden change in the destination of the
sum, which she had long thought of with
secret pride as "money i' th' bank." But she
was willing enough to part with it, if necessary,
for Benjamin. Only, how such a sum could be
necessary, was the puzzle. But even this
perplexity was jostled out of her mind by the
overwhelming idea, not only of "our Ben" settling
in London, but of Bessy going there too as his
wife. This great trouble swallowed up all care
about money, and Hester shivered and sighed all
the night through with distress. In the morning,
as Bessy was kneading the bread, her aunt,
who had been sitting by the fire in an unusual
manner for one of her active habits, said:

"I reckon we mun go to th' shop for our
bread, an' that's a thing I never thought to come
to so long as I lived."

Bessy looked up from her kneading, surprised.

"I'm sure I'm noan going to eat their nasty
stuff. What for do ye want to get baker's
bread, aunt? This dough will rise as high as
a kite in a south wind."

"I'm not up to kneading as I could do once;
it welly breaks my back; and when thou'rt off in
London, I reckon we mun buy our bread, first
time in my life."

"I'm not a-going to London," said Bessy,
kneading away with fresh resolution, and growing
very red, either with the idea or the exertion.

"But our Ben is going partner wi' a great
London lawyer, and thou know'st he'll not
tarry long but what he'll fetch thee."

"Now, aunt," said Bessy, stripping her arms
of the dough, but still not looking up, "if that's
all, don't fret yourself. Ben will have twenty
minds in his head afore he settles, eyther in
business or in wedlock. I sometimes wonder,"
she said, with increasing vehemence, "why I
go on thinking on him; for I dunnot think he
thinks on me when I'm out o' sight. I've a
month's mind to try and forget him this
time when he leaves us--that I have!"

"For shame, wench! and he to be planning
and purposing all for thy sake. It wur only
yesterday as he wur talking to thy uncle, and
mapping' it out so clever; only thou seest,
wench, it'll be dree work for us when both thee
and him is gone."

The old woman began to cry the kind of
tearless cry of the aged. Bessy hastened to
comfort her; and the two talked, and grieved,
and hoped, and planned for the days that now
were to be, till they ended, the one in being
consoled, the other in being secretly happy.

Nathan and his son came back from Highminster
that evening, with their business transacted in the
round-about way, which was most satisfactory to
the old man. If he had thought it necessary to
take half as much pains in ascertaining the truth
of the plausible details by which his son bore out
the story of the offered partnership, as he did
in trying to get his money conveyed to London
in the most secure manner, it would have been
well for him. But he knew nothing of all this,
and acted in the way which satisfied his anxiety
best. He came home tired, but content; not in
such high spirits as on the night before, but
as easy in his mind as he could be on the eve of
his son's departure. Bessy, pleasantly agitated
by her aunt's tale of the morning of her
cousin's true love for her--what ardently we
wish we long believe--and the plan which was
to end in their marriage--end to her, the
woman, at least--Bessy looked almost pretty
in her bright, blushing comeliness, and more than
once, as she moved about from kitchen to dairy,
Benjamin pulled her towards him, and gave her
a kiss. To all such proceedings the old couple
were wilfully blind; and, as night drew on, every
one became sadder and quieter, thinking of the
parting that was to be on the morrow. As
the hours drew on, Bessy, too, became
subdued; and, by-and-by, her simple cunning was
exerted to get Benjamin to sit down next his
mother, whose very heart was yearning after
him, as Bessy saw. When once her child
was placed by her side, and she had got
possession of his hand, the old woman kept
stroking it, and murmuring long unused words
of endearment, such as she had spoken to him
while he was yet a little child. But all this was
wearisome to him. As long as he might play
with, and plague, and caress Bessy, he had not
been sleepy; but now he yawned loudly. Bessy
could have boxed his ears for not curbing this
gaping; at any rate, he needed not to have done
it so openly--so almost ostentatiously. His
mother was more pitiful.

"Thou'rt tired, my lad!" said she, putting
her hand fondly on his shoulder; but it fell off,
as he stood up suddenly, and said:

"Yes, deuced tired! I'm off to bed." And
with a rough careless kiss all round, even to
Bessy, as if he was "deuced tired" of playing the
lover, he was gone; leaving the three to gather up
their thoughts slowly, and follow him up-stairs.

He seemed almost impatient at them for rising
betimes to see him off the next morning, and
made no more of a good-by than some such speech
as this: "Well, good folk, when next I see you,
I hope you'll have merrier faces than you have
today. Why, you might be going to a funeral; it's
enough to scare a man from the place; you look
quite ugly to what you did last night, Bess."

He was gone; and they turned into the house,
and settled to the long day's work without many
words about their loss. They had no time for
unnecessary talking, indeed, for much had been
left undone during his short visit that ought to
have been done; and they had now to work
double tides. Hard work was their comfort for
many a long day.

For some time, Benjamin's letters, if not
frequent, were full of exultant accounts of his
well-doing. It is true that the details of his
prosperity were somewhat vague; but the fact was
broadly and unmistakably stated. Then came
longer pauses; shorter letters, altered in tone.
About a year after he had left them, Nathan
received a letter, which bewildered and
irritated him exceedingly. Something had gone
wrong--what, Benjamin did not say--but the
letter ended with a request that was almost
a demand, for the remainder of his father's
savings, whether in the stocking or the
bank. Now the year had not been prosperous
with Nathan; there had been an epidemic
among cattle, and he had suffered along with
his neighbours; and, moreover, the price of
cows, when he had bought some to repair
his wasted stock, was higher than he had ever
remembered it before. The fifteen pounds in the
stocking, which Benjamim Ieft, had diminished
to little more than three; and to have that
required of him in so peremptory a manner!
Before Nathan imparted the contents of this
letter to any one (Bessy and her aunt had gone
to market on a neighbour's cart that day), he got
pen and ink and paper, and wrote back an ill-spelt,
but very implicit and stern negative.
Benjamin had had his portion; and if he could not
make it do, so much the worse for him; his
father had no more to give him. That was the
substance of the letter.

The letter was written, directed, and sealed,
and given to the country postman, returning
to Highminster after his day's distribution and
collection of letters, before Hester and Bessy
returned from market. It had been a pleasant
day of neighbourly meeting and sociable gossip:
prices had been high, and they were in good
spirits, only agreeably tired, and full of small
pieces of news. It was some time before they
found out how flatly all their talk fell on the
ears of the stay-at-home listener. But, when
they saw that his depression was caused by
something beyond their powers of accounting for by
any little every day cause, they urged him to tell
them what was the matter. His anger had not
gone off. It had rather increased by dwelling
upon it, and he spoke it out in good resolute
terms; and, long ere he had ended, the
two women were as sad, if not as angry, as
himself. Indeed, it was many days before either
feeling wore away in the minds of those who
entertained them. Bessy was the soonest
comforted, because she found a vent for her sorrow
in action; an action that was half as a kind of
compensation for many a sharp word that she had
spoken when her cousin had done anything to
displease her on his last visit, and half because
she believed that he never could have written
such a letter to his father unless his want of
money had been very pressing and real; though
how he could ever have wanted money so soon,
after such a heap of it had been given to him,
was more than she could justly say. Bessy got
out all her savings of little presents of sixpences
and shillings, ever since she had been a child, of
all the money she had gained for the eggs of two
hens, called her own, she put all together, and it
was above two pound--two pound five and seven-pence,
to speak accurately--and, leaving out the
penny as a nest egg for her future savings, she
put up the rest in a little parcel, and sent it, with
a note, to Benjamin's address in London:

"From a well-wisher.

"Dr BENJAMIN,--Unkle has lost 2 cows
and a vast of monney. He is a good deal
Angored, but more Troubled. So no more at
present. Hopeing this will finding you well As
it leaves us. Tho' lost to Site, To Memory
Dear. Repayment not kneeded.

                       "Your effectonet cousin,

                              "ELIZABETH ROSE."

When this packet was once fairly sent off,
Bessy began to sing again over her work. She
never expected the mere form of acknowledgment;
indeed, she had such faith in the carrier
(who took parcels to York, whence they were
forwarded to London by coach), that she felt
sure that he would go on purpose to London to
deliver anything entrusted to him, if he had not
full confidence in the person, persons, coach and
horses, to whom he committed it. Therefore she
was not anxious that she did not hear of its
arrival. "Giving a thing to a man as one
knows," said she to herself, "is a vast different
to poking a thing through a hole into a box, th'
inside of which one has never clapped eyes on;
and yet letters get safe some ways or another."
(This belief in the infallibility of the post was
destined a shock before long.) But she had a
secret yearning for Benjamin's thanks, and some
of the old words of love that she had been without
so long. Nay, she even thought--when,
day after day, week after week, passed by
without a line--that he might be winding up his
affairs in that weary, wasteful London, and
coming back to Nab-end to thank her in person.

One day--her aunt was up-stairs, inspecting
the summer's make of cheeses, her uncle out in
the fields--the postman brought a letter into
the kitchen to Bessy. A country postman, even
now, is not much pressed for time, and in those
days there were but few letters to distribute,
and they were only sent out from Highminster
once a week into the district in which Nab-end
was situated; and on those occasions the letter-carrier
usually paid morning calls on the various
people for whom he had letters. So, half
standing by the dresser, half sitting on it, he
began to rummage out his bag. "It's a queer-like
thing I've got for Nathan this time. I am
afraid it will bear ill news in it, for there's 'Dead
Letter Office' stamped on the top of it."

"Lord save us!" said Bessy, and sat down
on the nearest chair, as white as a sheet. In
an instant, however, she was up, and, snatching
the ominous letter out of the man's hands, she
pushed him before her out of the house, and said,
"Be off wi' thee, afore aunt comes down;" and
ran past him as hard as she could till she reached
the field where she expected to find her uncle.

"Uncle," said she, breathless, "what is it?
Oh, uncle, speak! Is he dead?"

Nathan's hands trembled, and his eyes dazzled.
"Take it," he said, "and tell me what it is."

"It's a letter--it's from you to Benjamin, it
is and there's words printed with it, 'Not
known at the address given;' so they've sent it
back to the writer--that's you, uncle. Oh, it
gave me such a start, with them nasty words
printed outside!"

Nathan had taken the letter back into his own
hands, and was turning it over, while he strove
to understand what the quick-witted Bessy had
picked up at a glance. But he arrived at a
different conclusion.

"He's dead?" said he. "The lad is dead,
and he never knowed how as I were sorry I
wrote to 'un so sharp. My lad! my lad!"
Nathan sat down on the ground where he
stood, and covered his face with his old,
withered hands. The letter returned to him
was one which he had written with infinite
pains and at various times, to tell his child, in
kinder words and at greater length than he had
done before, the reasons why he could not send
him the money demanded. And now Benjamin
was dead; nay, the old man immediately jumped
to the conclusion that his child had been starved
to death, without money, in a wild, wide, strange
place. All he could say at first was:

"My heart, Bess--my heart is broken!" And
he put his hand to his side, still keeping his
shut eyes covered with the other, as though he
never wished to see the light of day again.
Bessy was down by his side in an instant,
holding him in her arms, chafing and kissing him.

"It's noan so bad, uncle; he's not dead; the
letter does not say that, dunnot think it. He's
flitted from that lodging, and the lazy tyke
dunna know where to find him; and so, they just
send y' back th' letter, instead of trying fra'
house to house, as Mark Benson would. I've
always heerd tell on south country folk for laziness.
He's noan dead, uncle; he's just flitted,
and he'll let us know afore long where he's
getten to. Mebby it's a cheaper place, for that
lawyer has cheated him, ye recklet, and he'll
be trying to live for as little as can, that's all,
uncle. Dunnot take on so, for it doesna say
he's dead." By this time, Bessy was crying
with agitation, although she firmly believed in
her own view of the case, and had felt the
opening of the ill-favoured letter as a great
relief. Presently she began to urge both with
word and action upon her uncle, that he should
sit no longer on the damp grass. She pulled
him up, for he was very stiff, and, as he said,
"all shaken to dithers." She made him walk
about, repeating over and over again her solution
of the case, always in the same words,
beginning again and again, "He's noan dead;
it's just been a flitting," and so on. Nathan
shook his head, and tried to be convinced;
but it was a steady belief in his own heart for
all that. He looked so deathly ill on his return
home with Bessy (for she would not let him go
on with his day's work), that his wife made sure
he had taken cold, and he, weary and indifferent
to life, was glad to subside into bed and the rest
from exertion which his real bodily illness gave
him. Neither Bessy nor he spoke of the letter
again, even to each other, for many days; and
Bessy found means to stop Mark Benson's
tongue, and satisfy his kindly curiosity by giving
him the rosy side of her own view of the case.

Nathan got up again an older man in looks
and constitution by ten years for that week of
bed. His wife gave him many a scolding on
his imprudence for sitting down in the wet field,
if ever so tired. But now she, too, was beginning
to be uneasy at Benjamin's long-continued
silence. She could not write herself, but she
urged her husband many a time to send a
letter to ask for news of her lad. He said
nothing in reply for some time; at length he
told her he would write next Sunday afternoon.
Sunday was his general time for writing,
and this Sunday he meant to go to church
for the first time since his illness. On Saturday
he was very persistent against his wife's
wishes (backed by Bessy as hard as she could),
in resolving to go into Highminster to market.
The change would do him good, he said. But
he came home tired, and a little mysterious
in his ways. When he went to the
shippon the last thing at night, he asked Bessy
to go with him, and hold the lantern, while he
looked at an ailing cow; and, when they were
fairly out of the earshot of the house, he pulled
out a little shop-parcel, and said to her,

"Thou'lt put that on ma Sunday hat, wilt 'ou
lass? It'll be a bit on a comfort to me; for I know
my lad's dead and gone, though I dunna speak
on it for fear o' grieving th' old woman and ye."

"I'll put it on, uncle, if--But he's noan
dead." (Bessy was sobbing.)

"I know--I know, lass. I dunnot wish other
folk to hold my opinion; but I'd like to wear a
bit o' crape, out o' respect to my boy. It 'ud
have done me good for to have ordered a black
coat, but she'd see if I had na' on my wedding-coat,
Sundays, for a' she's losing her eyesight,
poor old wench! But she'll ne'er take notice o' a
bit o' crape. Thou'll put it on all canny and tidy."

So Nathan went to church with a strip of
crape as narrow as Bessy durst venture to make
it round his hat. Such is the contradictoriness
of human nature, that, though he was most
anxious his wife should not hear of his conviction
that their son was dead, he was half hurt that
none of the neighbours noticed his sign of mourning
so far as to ask him for whom he wore it.

But after a while, when they never heard a
word from or about Benjamin, the household
wonder as to what had become of him grew so
painful and strong, that Nathan no longer kept
his idea to himself. Poor Hester, however,
rejected it with her whole will, heart, and soul.
She could not and would not believe--nothing
should make her believe--that her only child
Benjamin had died without some sign of love or
farewell to her. No arguments could shake her
in this. She believed that if all natural means
of communication between her and him had been
cut off at the last supreme moment--if death had
come upon him in an instant, sudden and
unexpected--her intense love would, she believed, have
been supernaturally made conscious of the blank.
Nathan at times tried to feel glad that she could
still hope to see the lad again; but at other
moments he wanted her sympathy in his grief, his
self-reproach, his weary wonder as to how and
what they had done wrong in the treatment of
their son, that he had been such a care and
sorrow to his parents. Bessy was convinced, first
by her aunt, and then by her uncle--honestly
convinced--on both sides of the argument; and so,
for the time, able to sympathise with each. But
she lost her youth in a very few months; she
looked set and middle aged long before she
ought to have done; and rarely smiled and
never sang again.

All sorts of new arrangements were required
by the blow which told so miserably upon the
energies of all the household at Nab-end.
Nathan could no longer go about and direct his
two men, taking a good turn of work himself at
busy times. Hester lost her interest in her
dairy; for which indeed her increasing loss of
sight unfitted her. Bessy would either do field
work, or attend to the cows, the shippon, or
churn, or make cheese; she did all well, no
longer merrily, but with something of stern
cleverness. But she was not sorry when her
uncle one evening told her aunt and her that a
neighbouring farmer, Job Kirkby, had made him
an offer to take so much of his land off his
hands as would leave him only pasture enough
for two cows, and no arable to attend to; while
Farmer Kirkby did not wish to interfere with
anything in the house, only would be glad to use
some of the outbuildings for his fattening cattle.

"We can do wi' Hawky and Daisy; it'll
leave us eight or ten pound o' butter to take to
market i' summer time, and keep us fra' thinking
too much, which is what I'm dreading on as
I get into years."

"Ay," said his wife. "Thou'll not have to
go so far afield, if it's only the Aster-Toft as is on
thy hands. And Bess will have to gi' up her
pride i' cheese, and tak' to making cream-butter.
I'd allays a fancy for trying at cream-butter, but
th' whey had to be used; else, where I come fra,
they'd never ha' looked near whey-butter."

When Hester was left alone with Bessy, she
said, in allusion to this change of plan,

"I'm thankful to the Lord as it is as it is:
for I were allays feared Nathan would have to
gie up the house and farm altogether, and then
the lad would na' know where to find us when
he came back fra Merikay. He's gone there for
to make his fortune, I'll be bound. Keep up thy
heart, lass, he'll be home some day; and have
sown his wild oats. Eh! but thatten's a pretty
story i' the Gospels about the Prodigal who'd to
eat the pigs' vittle at one time, but ended i'
clover in his father's house. And I'm sure our
Nathan 'll be ready to forgive him, and love
him, and make much of him, mebby a deal more
nor me, who never gave in to's death. It 'll
be liken to a resurrection to our Nathan."

Farmer Kirkby then, took by far the greater
part of the land belonging to Nab-end Farm;
and the work about the rest, and about the two
remaining cows was easily done by three pairs
of willing hands with a little occasional assistance.
The Kirkby family were pleasant enough
to have to deal with. There was a son, a stiff, grave
bachelor, who was very particular and methodical
about his work, and rarely spoke to any
one. But Nathan took it into his head that
John Kirkby was looking after Bessy, and was
a good deal troubled in his mind in consequence;
for it was the first time he had to face the effects
of his belief in his son's death; and he
discovered to his own surprise that he had not
that implicit faith which would make it easy for
him to look upon Bessy as the wife of another
man than the one to whom she had been be
trothed in her youth. As, however, John Kirkby
seemed in no hurry to make his intentions (if
indeed he had any) clear to Bessy, it was only
at times that this jealousy on behalf of his lost
son seized upon Nathan.

But people, old, and in deep hopeless sorrow,
grow irritable at times, however they may
repent and struggle against their irritability.
There were days when Bessy had to bear a good
deal from her uncle; but she loved him so dearly
and respected him so much, that high as her
temper was to all other people she never
returned him a rough or impatient word. And
she had a reward in the conviction of his deep,
true affection for her, and in her aunt's entire
and most sweet dependence upon her.

One day, however--it was near the end of
November--Bessy had had a good deal to bear
that seemed more than usually unreasonable on
behalf of her uncle. The truth was, that one of
Kirkby's cows was ill, and John Kirkby was a
good deal about in the farm-yard; Bessy was
interested about the animal, and had helped in
preparing a mash over their own fire, that had to
be given warm to the sick creature. If John
had been out of the way, there would have been
no one more anxious about the affair than
Nathan; both because he was naturally kind-hearted
and neighbourly, and also because he was rather
proud of his reputation for knowledge in the
diseases of cattle. But because John was about,
and Bessy helping a little in what had to be
done, Nathan would do nothing, and chose to
assume that "nothing to think on ailed th' beast,
but lads and lasses were allays fain to be feared
on something." Now John was upwards of
forty, and Bessy nearly eight-and-twenty, so the
terms lads and lasses did not exactly apply to
their case.

When Bessy brought the milk in from their
own cows towards half-past five o'clock, Nathan
bade her make the doors, and not be running
out i' the dark and cold about other folk's
business; and, though Bessy was a little surprised
and a good deal annoyed at his tone, she sat
down to her supper without making a
remonstrance. It had long been Nathan's custom to
look out the last thing at night to see "what
mak' o' weather it wur;" and, when towards
half-past eight he got his stick and went out--
two or three steps from the door which opened
into the houseplace where they were sitting--
Hester put her hand on her niece's shoulder and
said:

"He's gotten a touch o' the rheumatics, as
twinges him and makes him speak so sharp. I
didna like to ask thee afore him, but how's yon
poor beast?"

"Very ailing, belike. John Kirkby wur off
for th' cow-doctor when I cam in. I'll reckon
they'll have to stop up wi't a' night."

Since their sorrows, her uncle had taken
to reading a chapter in the Bible aloud, the
last thing at night. He could not read fluently,
and often hesitated long over a word, which
he miscalled at length; but the very fact of
opening the book seemed to soothe those old
bereaved parents; for it made them feel quiet
and safe in the presence of God, and took
them out of the cares and troubles of this world
into that futurity which, however dim and vague,
was to their faithful hearts as a sure and certain
rest. This little quiet time--Nathan sitting with
his horn spectacles on; the tallow candle
between him and his Bible, and throwing a strong
light on his reverent, earnest face; Hester sitting
on the other side of the fire, her head bowed
in attentive listening, now and then shaking
it, and moaning a little, but when a promise
came, or any good tidings of great joy, saying
"Amen." with fervour; Bessy by her aunt,
perhaps her mind a little wandering to some household
cares, or it might be on thoughts of those
who were absent--this little quiet pause, I say,
was grateful and soothing to this household, as
a lullaby to a tired child. But this night, Bessy
--sitting opposite to the long low window, only
shaded by a few geraniums that grew in the sill,
and the door alongside that window, through
which her uncle had passed not a quarter of an
hour before--saw the wooden latch of the door
gently and almost noiselessly lifted up, as if some
one were trying it from the outside.

She was startled; and watched again, intently;
but it was perfectly still now. She thought it must
have been that it had not fallen into its proper
place when her uncle had come in and locked
the door. It was just enough to make her
uncomfortable, no more; and she almost persuaded
herself it must have been fancy. Before she
went up-stairs, however, she went to the window
to look out into the darkness; but all was still.
Nothing to be seen; nothing to be heard. So
the three went quietly up-stairs to bed.

The house was little better than a cottage. The
front door opened on a houseplace, over which was
the old couple's bedroom. To the left, as you
entered this pleasant houseplace and at close
right angles with the entrance, was a door that
led into the small parlour, which was Hester and
Bessy's pride, although not half as comfortable
as the houseplace, and never on any occasion
used as a sitting-room. There were shells and
bunches of honesty in the fireplace; the best
chest of drawers, and a company-set of gaudy-coloured
china, and a bright common carpet on
the floor; but all failed to give it the aspect of
the homely comfort and delicate cleanliness of
the houseplace. Over this parlour was the
bedroom which Benjamin had slept in when a boy
--when at home. It was kept still in a kind of
readiness for him. The bed was still there, in
which none had slept since he, eight or nine years
ago; and every now and then the warming-pan
was taken quietly and silently up by his old
mother, and the bed thoroughly aired. But this
she did in her husband's absence, and without
saying a word to any one; nor did Bessy offer to
help her, though her eyes often filled with tears,
as she saw her aunt still going through the hopeless
service. But the room had become a receptacle
for all unused things; and there was always
a corner of it appropriated to the winter's store
of apples. To the left of the houseplace, as you
stood facing the fire, on the side opposite to the
window and outer door, were two other doors;
the one on the right opened into a kind of back
kitchen, and had a lean-to roof, and a door
opening on to the farm-yard and back premises;
the left-hand door gave on the stairs, underneath
which was a closet, in which various household
treasures were kept, and beyond that the dairy,
over which Bessy slept; her little chamber
window opening just above the sloping roof of
the back kitchen. There were neither blinds
nor shutters to any of the windows, either up-stairs
or down; the house was built of stone,
and there was heavy framework of the same
material round the little casement windows, and
the long, low window of the houseplace was
divided by what, in grander dwellings would be
called mullions.

By nine o'clock this night of which I am
speaking, all had gone up-stairs to bed: it was
even later than usual, for the burning of candles
was regarded so much in the light of extravagance,
that the household kept early hours even
for country-folk. But somehow this evening,
Bessy could not sleep, although in general she
was in deep slumber five minutes after her head
touched the pillow. Her thoughts ran on the
chances for John Kirkby's cow, and a little fear lest
the disorder might be epidemic, and spread to
their own cattle. Across all these homely cares
came a vivid, uncomfortable recollection of the
way in which the door latch went up and down
without any sufficient agency to account for it.
She felt more sure now, than she had done
downstairs, that it was a real movement and no effect
of her imagination. She wished that it had not
happened just when her uncle was reading, that
she might at once have gone quick to the door,
and convinced herself of the cause. As it was,
her thoughts ran uneasily on the supernatural;
and thence to Benjamin, her dear cousin and
playfellow, her early lover. She had long given
him up as lost for ever to her, if not actually
dead; but this very giving him up for ever
involved a free, full forgiveness of all his wrongs to
her. She thought tenderly of him, as of one who
might have been led astray in his later years,
but who existed rather in her recollection as the
innocent child, the spirited lad, the handsome,
dashing young man. If John Kirkby's quiet
attentions had ever betrayed his wishes to Bessy--
if indeed he ever had any wishes on the subject--
her first feeling would have been to compare his
weather-beaten, middle-aged face and figure with
the face and figure she remembered well, but
never more expected to see in this life. So
thinking, she became very restless, and weary of
bed, and, after long tossing and turning, ending
in a belief that she should never get to sleep at
all that night, she went off soundly and suddenly.

As suddenly was she wide awake, sitting up in
bed, listening to some noise that must have
awakened her, but which was not repeated for some
time. Surely it was in her uncle's room--her uncle
was up; but for a minute or two there was no
further sound. Then she heard him open his door,
and go down stairs, with hurried, stumbling steps.
She now thought that her aunt must be ill, and
hastily sprang out of bed, and was putting on
her petticoat with hurried, trembling hands, and
had just opened her chamber door, when she
heard the front door undone, and a scuffle, as of
the feet of several people, and many rude,
passionate words, spoken hoarsely below the breath.
Quick as thought she understood it all--the
house was lonely--her uncle had the reputation
of being well-to-do--they had pretended to be
belated, and had asked their way or something.
What a blessing that John Kirkby's cow was sick,
for there were several men watching with him.
She went back, opened her window, squeezed
herself out, slid down the lean-to roof, and
ran, barefoot and breathless, to the shippon.

"John, John, for the love of God come quick;
there's robbers in the house, and uncle and
aunt 'll be murdered!" she whispered, in terrified
accents, through the closed and barred shippon
door. In a moment it was undone, and John
and the cow-doctor stood there, ready to act, if
they but understood her rightly. Again she
repeated her words, with broken, half-unintelligible
explanations of what she as yet did not
rightly understand.

"Front door is open, say'st thou?" said John,
arming himself with a pitchfork, while the cow-doctor
took some other implement. "Then I
reckon we'd best make for that way o' getting
into th' house, and catch 'em all in a trap."

"Run! run!" was all Bessy could say,
taking hold of John Kirkby's arm, and pulling
him along with her. Swiftly did the three run
to the house, round the corner, and in at the open
front door. The men carried the horn lantern
they had been using in the shippon, and, by the
sudden oblong light that it threw upon objects,
Bessy saw the principal one of her anxiety, her
uncle, lying stunned and helpless on the kitchen
floor. Her first thought was for him; for she
had no idea that her aunt was in any immediate
danger, although she heard the noise of feet,
and fierce subdued voices up-stairs.

"Make th' door behind us, lass. We'll not
let them escape!" said brave John Kirkby,
dauntless in a good cause, though he knew not
how many there might be above. The cow-doctor
fastened and locked the door, saying,
"There!" in a defiant tone, as he put the key in
his pocket. It was to be a struggle for life or
for death, or, at any rate, for effectual capture
or desperate escape. Bessy kneeled down by
her uncle, who did not speak nor give any sign of
consciousness. Bessy raised his head by drawing
a pillow off the settle and putting it under
him; she longed to go for water into the back
kitchen, but the sound of a violent struggle, and of
heavy blows, and of low, hard curses spoken
through closed teeth, and muttered passion, as
though breath were too much needed for action to
be wasted in speech, kept her still and quiet by her
uncle's side in the kitchen, where the darkness
might almost be felt, so thick and deep was it.
Once--in a pause of her own heart's beating--a
sudden terror came over her; she perceived, in
that strange way in which the presence of a
living creature forces itself on our consciousness
in the darkest room, that some one was near her,
keeping as still as she. It was not the poor old
man's breathing that she heard, nor the radiation
of his presence that she felt: some one else was
in the kitchen; another robber, perhaps, left to
guard the old man with murderous intent if his
consciousness returned. Now, Bessy was fully
aware that self-preservation would keep her
terrible companion quiet, as there was no motive
for his betraying himself stronger than the desire
of escape; any effort for which he, the unseen
witness, must know would be rendered abortive
by the fact of the door being locked. Yet the
knowledge that he was there, close to her, still,
silent as the grave, with fearful, it might be
deadly, unspoken thoughts in his heart, possibly
even with keener and stronger sight than hers,
as longer accustomed to the darkness, able to
discern her figure and posture, and glaring at
her like some wild beast, Bessy could not fail to
shrink from the vision that her fancy presented.
And still the struggle went on up-stairs; feet
slipping, blows sounding, and the wrench of
intentioned aims, the strong gasps for breath, as
the wrestlers paused for an instant. In one of
these pauses Bessy felt conscious of a creeping
movement close to her, which ceased when the
noise of the strife above died away, and was
resumed when it again began. She was aware of
it by some subtle vibration of the air rather than
by touch or sound. She was sure that he who
had been close to her one minute as she knelt,
was, the next, passing stealthily towards the
inner door which led to the staircase. She
thought he was going to join and strengthen his
accomplices, and, with a great cry, she sprang
after him; but, just as she came to the doorway,
through which some dim portion of light from
the upper chambers came, she saw one man
thrown down stairs with such violence that he
fell almost at her very feet, while the dark, creeping
figure glided suddenly away to the left, and
as suddenly entered the closet beneath the stairs.
Bessy had no time to wonder as to his purpose
in so doing, whether he had at first designed to
aid his accomplices in their desperate fight. He
was an enemy, a robber, that was all she knew,
and she sprang to the door of the closet, and in
a trice had locked it on the outside. And then
she stood frightened, panting in that dark corner,
sick with terror lest the man who lay before her
was either John Kirkby or the cow-doctor. If it
were either of those friendly two, what would
become of the other--of her uncle, her aunt,
herself? But, in a very few minutes, this wonder
was ended; her two defenders came slowly and
heavily down the stairs, dragging with them a
man, fierce, sullen, despairing--disabled with
terrible blows, which had made his face one
bloody, swollen mass. As for that, neither John
nor the cow-doctor were much more presentable.
One of them bore the lantern in his teeth, for
all their strength was taken up by the weight of
the fellow they were bearing.

"Take care," said Bessy, from her corner; "there's
a chap just beneath your feet. I dunno if he's dead
or alive, and uncle lies on the floor just beyond."
They stood still on the stairs for a moment.
Just then the robber they had thrown down
stairs stirred and moaned.

"Bessy," said John, "run off to th' stable
and fetch ropes and gearing for to bind 'em, and
we'll rid the house on 'em, and thou can'st go
see after th' oud folks, who need it sadly."

Bessy was back in a very few minutes. When
she came in, there was more light in the houseplace,
for some one had stirred up the raked fire.

"That felly makes as though his leg were
broken," said John, nodding towards the man
still lying on the ground. Bessy felt almost
sorry for him as they handled him--not over
gently--and bound him, only half-conscious, as
hardly and tightly as they had done his fierce,
surly companion. She even felt so sorry for his
evident agony, as they turned him over and over,
that she ran to get him a cup of water to
moisten his lips,

"I'm loth to leave yo' with him alone," said
John, "though I'm thinking his leg is broken
for sartain, and he can't stir, even if he comes to
hissel, to do yo' any harm. But we'll just take
off this chap, and make sure of him, and then
one on us 'll come back to yo', and we can,
mebby, find a gate or so for yo' to get shut on
him out o' th' house. This felly's made safe
enough, I'll be bound," said he, looking at the
burglar, who stood, bloody and black, with fell hatred
on his sullen face. His eye caught Bessy's as
hers fell on him with dread so evident that it
made him smile, and the look and the smile
prevented the words from being spoken which were
on Bessy's lips. She dared not tell, before him,
that an able-bodied accomplice still remained in
the house, lest, somehow, the door which kept
him a prisoner should be broken open, and the
fight renewed. So she only said to John, as he
was leaving the house:

"Thou'lt not be long away, for I'm afeard of
being left wi' this man."

"He'll noan do thee harm," said John.

"No! but I'm feared lest he should die. And
there's uncle and aunt. Come back soon, John!"

"Ay, ay!" said he, half-pleased; "I'll be back,
never fear me."

So Bessy shut the door after them, but did
not lock if for fear of mischances in the house,
and went once more to her uncle, whose breathing,
by this time, was easier than when she had
first returned into the houseplace with John and
the doctor. By the light of the fire, too, she
could now see that he had received a blow on
the head which was probably the occasion of his
stupor. Round this wound, which was now
bleeding pretty freely, Bessy put cloths dipped
in cold water, and then, leaving him for a time,
she lighted a candle, and was about to go up-stairs
to her aunt, when, just as she was passing
the bound and disabled robber, she heard her
name softly, urgently called.

"Bessy, Bessy!" At first the voice sounded
so close that she thought it must be the
unconscious wretch at her feet. But once again that
voice thrilled through her:

"Bessy, Bessy! for God's sake, let me out!"

She went to the stair-closet door, and tried to
speak, but could not, her heart beat so terribly.
Again, close to her ear:

"Bessy, Bessy! they'll be back directly; let
me out, I say! For God's sake, let me out!" And
he began to kick violently against the panels.

"Hush, hush!" she said, sick with a terrible
dread, yet with a will strongly resisting her
conviction. "Who are you?" But she knew--
knew quite well.

"Benjamin." An oath. "Let me out, I
say, and I'll be off, and out of England by
tomorrow night never to come back, and you'll
have all my father's money."

"D'ye think I care for that," said Bessy,
vehemently, feeling with trembling hands for the
lock; "I wish there was noan such a thing as
money i' the world, afore yo'd come to this.
There, yo're free, and I charge yo' never to let
me see your face again. I'd ne'er ha let yo'
loose but for fear o' breaking their hearts, if yo'
hanna killed them already." But, before she had
ended her speech, he was gone--off into the black
darkness, leaving the door open wide. With a
new terror in her mind Bessy shut it afresh--
shut it and bolted it this time. Then she sat
down on the first chair, and relieved her soul
by giving a great and exceeding bitter cry. But
she knew it was no time for giving way, and,
lifting herself up with as much effort as if each
of her limbs was a heavy weight, she went into
the back-kitchen, and took a drink of cold
water. To her surprise she heard her uncle's
voice, saying feebly:

"Carry me up, and lay me by her."

But Bessy could not carry him; she could only
help his faint exertions to walk up-stairs; and,
by the time he was there sitting panting on the
first chair she could find, John Kirkby and
Atkinson returned. John came up now to her
aid. Her aunt lay across the bed in a fainting fit,
and her uncle sat in so utterly broken-down a
state that Bessy feared immediate death for both.
But John cheered her up, and lifted the old man
into his bed again, and, while Bessy tried to
compose poor Hester's limbs into a position of
rest, John went down to hunt about for the
little store of gin which was always kept in a
corner cupboard against emergencies.

"They've had a sore fright," said he, shaking
his head, as he poured a little gin and hot water
into their mouths with a teaspoon, while Bessy
chafed their cold feet; "and it and the cold
have been welly too much for 'em, poor old folk!"

He looked tenderly at them, and Bessy blessed
him in her heart--blessed him unaware, for that
look.

"I mun be off. I sent Atkinson up to th'
farm for to bring down Bob, and Jack came wi'
him back to th' shippon for to look after other
man. He began blackguarding us all round, so
Bob and Jack were gagging him wi' bridles
when I left,"

"Ne'er give heed to what he says," cried
poor Bessy, a new panic besetting her. "Folks
o' his sort are allays for dragging other folks
into their mischief. I'm right glad he were well
gagged."

"Well! but what I were saying were this.
Atkinson and me will take t'other chap, who
seems quiet enough, to th' shippon, and it 'll be
one piece o' work for to mind them, and the
cow; and I'll saddle old bay mare, and ride for
constables and doctor fra Highminster. I'll bring
Dr. Preston up to see Nathan and Hester first, and
then I reckon th' broken-legged chap down
below must have his turn, for all as he's met wi'
his misfortunes in a wrong line o' life."

"Ay!" said Bessy. "We mun ha' the doctor
sure enough, for look at them how they lie!
like two stone statues on a church monument, so
sad and solemn."

"There's a look o' sense come back into their
faces, though, sin' they supped that gin-and-water.
I'd keep on a-bathing his head and giving
them a sup on't fra time to time, if I was you,
Bessy."

Bessy followed him down stairs, and lighted
the men out of the house. She dared not light
them carrying their burden even, until they
passed round the corner of the house; so strong
was her fearful conviction that Benjamin was
lurking near, seeking again to enter. She rushed
back into the kitchen, bolted and barred the
door, and pushed the end of the dresser against
it, shutting her eyes as she passed the
uncurtained window, for fear of catching a glimpse of
a white face pressed against the glass, and gazing
at her. The poor old couple lay quiet and
speechless, although Hester's position had
slightly altered: she had turned a little on her
side towards her husband, and had laid one
shrivelled arm around his neck. But he was
just as Bessy had left him, with the wet clothes
around his head, his eyes not wanting in a
certain intelligence, but solemn, and unconscious to
all that was passing around as the eyes of death.

His wife spoke a little from time to time--
said a word of thanks, perhaps, or so; but he,
never. All the rest of that terrible night Bessy
tended the poor old couple with constant care,
her own heart so stunned and bruised in its feelings
that she went about her pious duties almost
like one in a dream. The November morning
was long in coming; nor did she perceive any
change either for the worse or the better before
the doctor came, about eight o'clock. John
Kirkby brought him; and was full of the
capture of the two burglars.

As far as Bessy could make out, the participation
of that unnatural Third was unknown; it
was a relief, almost sickening in the revulsion it
gave her from her terrible fear, which now she felt
had haunted and held possession of her all night
long, and had in fact paralysed her from thinking.
Now she felt and thought with acute and
feverish vividness, owing no doubt in part to
the sleepless night she had passed. She felt
almost sure that her uncle (possibly her aunt
too) had recognised Benjamin; but there was a
faint chance that they had not done so, and
wild horses should never tear the secret from her,
nor should any inadvertent word betray the fact
that there had been a third person concerned.
As to Nathan, he had never uttered a word.
It was her aunt's silence that made Bessy fear
lest Hester knew, somehow, that her son was
concerned.

The doctor examined them both closely;
looked hard at the wound on Nathan's head;
asked questions which Hester answered shortly
and unwillingly, and Nathan not at all: shutting
his eyes as if even the sight of a stranger was
pain to him. Bessy replied in their stead to all
that she could answer respecting their state;
and followed the doctor down stairs with a beating
heart. When they came into the houseplace,
they found John had opened the outer
door to let in some fresh air, had brushed
the hearth and made up the fire, and put the
chairs and table in their right places. He
reddened a little as Bessy's eye fell upon his swollen
and battered face, but tried to smile it off in a
dry kind of way.

"Yo' see I'm an ould bachelor, and I just
thought as I'd redd up things a bit. How dun
yo' find 'em, doctor?"

"Well, the poor old couple have had a terrible
shock. I shall send them some soothing medicine
to bring down the pulse, and a lotion for the old
man's head. It is very well it bled so much;
there might have been a good deal of inflammation."
And so he went on, giving directions to
Bessy for keeping them quietly in bed through
the day. From these directions she gathered
that they were not, as she had feared all night
long, near to death. The doctor expected them
to recover, though they would require care.
She almost wished it had been otherwise, and
that they, and she too, might have just lain down
to their rest in the churchyard--so cruel did life
seem to her; so dreadful the recollection of that
subdued voice of the hidden robber, smiting her
with recognition.

All this time John was getting things ready
for breakfast, with something of the handiness
of a woman. Bessy half resented his officiousness
in pressing Dr. Preston to have a cup of
tea, she did so want him to begone and leave
her alone with her thoughts. She did not know
that all was done for love of her; that the hard-featured,
short-spoken John was thinking all the
time how ill and miserable she looked, and
trying with tender artifices to make it incumbent
upon her sense of hospitality to share Dr.
Preston's meal.

"I've seen as the cows is milked," said he,
"yourn and all; and Atkinson's brought ours
round fine. Whatten a marcy it were as she
were sick just very night! Yon two chaps
'ud ha' made short work on't if yo' hadna fetched
us in; and as it were we had a sore tussle. One
on 'em 'll bear the marks on't to his dying day,
wunnot he, doctor?"

"He'll barely have his leg well enough to
stand his trial at York Assizes; they're coming
off in a fortnight from now."

"Ay, and that reminds me, Bessy, yo'll have
to go witness before Justice Royds. Constables
bade me tell yo', and gie yo' this summons.
Dunnot be feared; it will not be a long job,
though I'm not saying as it 'll be a pleasant one.
Yo'll have to answer questions as to how, and
all about it; and Jane" (his sister) "will come
and stop wi' th' oud folks; and I'll drive yo' in
the shandry."

No one knew why Bessy's colour blenched, and
her eye clouded. No one knew how she
apprehended lest she should have to say that
Benjamin had been of the gang, if, indeed, in some
way the law had not followed on his heels quick
enough to catch him.

But that trial was spared her; she was warned
by John to answer questions, and say no more
than was necessary, for fear of making her story
less clear; and as she was known, by character,
at least to Justice Royds and his clerk, they
made the examination as little formidable as
possible.

When all was over, and John was driving her
back again, he expressed his rejoicing that there
would be evidence enough to convict the men
without summoning Nathan and Hester to identify
them. Bessy was so tired that she hardly
understood what an escape it was; how far greater
than even her companion understood.

Jane Kirkby stayed with her for a week or
more, and was an unspeakable comfort.
Otherwise she sometimes thought she should
have gone mad, with the face of her uncle
always reminding her in its stony expression
of agony, of that fearful night. Her aunt
was softer in her sorrow, as became one of her
faithful and pious nature; but it was easy to
see how her heart bled inwardly. She recovered
her strength sooner than her husband; but as
she recovered, the doctor perceived the rapid
approach of total blindness. Every day, nay,
every hour of the day, that Bessy dared, without
fear of exciting their suspicions of her knowledge,
she told them, as she had anxiously told them at
first, that only two men, and those perfect
strangers, had been discovered as being concerned in
the burglary. Her uncle would never have
asked a question about it, even if she had withheld
all information about the affair; but she
noticed the quick, watching, waiting glance of
his eye whenever she returned from any person
or place where she might have been supposed to
gain intelligence if Benjamin were suspected or
caught; and she hastened to relieve the old
man's anxiety, by always telling all that she had
heard; thankful that as the days passed on the
danger she sickened to think of grew less and
less.

Day by day Bessy had ground for thinking that
her aunt knew more than she had apprehended at
first. There was something so very humble and
touching in Hester's blind way of feeling about for
her husband--stern, woe-begone Nathan--and
mutely striving to console him in the deep agony
of which Bessy learnt from this loving, piteous
manner, that her aunt was conscious. Her aunt's
face looked blankly up into his, tears slowly
running down from her sightless eyes, while from
time to time, when she thought herself unheard
by any save him, she would repeat such texts as
she had heard at church in happier days, and
which she thought, in her true, simple piety,
might tend to console him. Yet day by day her
aunt grew more and more sad.

Three or four days before assize-time, two
summonses to attend the trial at York were sent
to the old people. Neither Bessy, nor John, nor
Jane, could understand this; for their own notices
had come long before, and they had been told
that their evidence would be enough to convict.

But alas! the fact was that the lawyer
employed to defend the prisoners had heard from
them that there was a third person engaged,
and had heard who that third person was;
and it was this advocate's business to diminish
if possible the guilt of his clients, by proving
that they were but tools in the hands of one who
had, from his superior knowledge of the premises
and the daily customs of the inhabitants, been
the originator and planner of the whole affair.
To do this it was necessary to have the evidence
of the parents, who, as the prisoners had said,
must have recognised the voice of the young
man, their son. For no one knew that Bessy,
too, could have borne witness to his having been
present, and, as it was supposed that Benjamin
had escaped out of England, there was no exact
betrayal of him on the part of his accomplices.

Wondering, bewildered, and weary, the old
couple reached York, in company with John and
Bessy, on the eve of the day of trial. Nathan
was still so self-contained, that Bessy could
never guess what had been passing in his mind.
He was almost passive under his old wife's
trembling caresses; he seemed hardly conscious
of them, so rigid was his demeanour.

She, Bessy feared at times, was becoming
childish; for she had evidently so great and
anxious a love for her husband, that her memory
seemed going in her endeavours to melt the
stoniness of his aspect and manners; she
appeared occasionally to have forgotten why he was
so changed, in her piteous little attempts to bring
him back to his former self.

"They'll for sure never torture them when
they see what old folks they are!" cried Bessy, on
the morning of the trial, a dim fear looming over
her mind. "They'll never be so cruel, for sure!"

But "for sure" it was so. The barrister looked
up at the judge, almost apologetically, as he saw
how hoary-headed and woeful an old man was
put into the witness-box when the defence came
on, and Nathan Huntroyd was called on for his
evidence.

"It is necessary, on behalf of my clients, my
lord, that I should pursue a course which, for
all other reasons, I deplore."

"Go on!" said the judge. "What is right
and legal must be done." But, an old man
himself, he covered his quivering mouth with his
hand as Nathan, with grey, unmoved face, and
solemn, hollow eyes, placing his two hands on
each side of the witness-box, prepared to give
his answers to questions, the nature of which he
was beginning to foresee, but would not shrink
from replying to truthfully; "the very stones"
(as he said to himself, with a kind of dulled sense
of the Eternal Justice), "rise up against such a
sinner."

"Your name is Nathan Huntroyd, I believe?"

"It is."

"You live at Nab-end Farm?"

"I do."

"Do you remember the night of November
the twelfth?"

"Yes."

"You were awakened that night by some
noise, I believe. What was it?"

The old man's eyes fixed themselves upon his
questioner with a look of a creature brought to
bay. That look the barrister never forgets. It
will haunt him till his dying day.

"It was a throwing up of stones against our
window."

"Did you hear it at first?"

"No."

"What awakened you, then?"

"She did."

"And then you both heard the stones. Did
you hear nothing else?"

A long pause. Then a low, clear "Yes."

"What?"

"Our Benjamin asking us for to let him in.
She said as it were him, leastways."

"And you thought it was him, did you not?"

"I told her" (this time in a louder voice) "for
to get to sleep, and not to be thinking that every
drunken chap as passed by were our Benjamin,
for that he were dead and gone."

"And she?"

"She said as though she'd heerd our Benjamin
afore she were welly awake, axing for to be
let in. But I bade her ne'er heed her dreams, but
turn on her other side, and get to sleep again."

"And did she?"

A long pause,--judge, jury, bar, audience, all
held their breath. At length Nathan said,

"No!"

"What did you do then? (My lord I am
compelled to ask these painful questions.)"

"I saw she wadna be quiet; she had allays
thought he would come back to us, like the
Prodigal i' th' Gospels." (His voice choked a little,
but he tried to make it steady, succeeded, and
went on.) "She said if I wadna get up she
would; and just then I heerd a voice. I'm
not quite mysel, gentlemen--I've been ill and
i' bed, an' it makes me trembling-like. Some
one said, 'Father, mother, I'm here, starving i'
the cold--wunnot yo' get up and let me in?'"

"And that voice was?"

"It were like our Benjamin's. I see whatten
yo're driving at, sir, and I'll tell yo' truth,
though it kills me to speak it. I dunnot say it
were our Benjamin as spoke, mind yo'--I only
say it were like--"

"That's all I want, my good fellow. And on
the strength of that entreaty, spoken in your
son's voice, you went down and opened the door
to these two prisoners at the bar, and to a
third man?"

Nathan nodded assent, and even that counsel
was too merciful to force him to put more
into words.

"Call Hester Huntroyd."

An old woman, with a face of which the eyes
were evidently blind, with a sweet, gentle, care-worn
face, came into the witness-box, and
meekly curtseyed to the presence of those
whom she had been taught to respect--a
presence she could not see.

There was something in her humble, blind
aspect, as she stood waiting to have something
done to her--what, her poor troubled mind
hardly knew--that touched all who saw her,
inexpressibly. Again the counsel apologised, but
the judge could not reply in words; his face
was quivering all over, and the jury looked
uneasily at the prisoners' counsel. That gentleman
saw that he might go too far, and send their
sympathies off on the other side; but one or two
questions he must ask. So, hastily recapitulating
much that he had learned from Nathan, he said,
"You believed it was your son's voice asking to
be let in?"

"Ay! Our Benjamin came home, I'm sure;
choose where he is gone."

She turned her head about, as if listening for
the voice of her child, in the hushed silence of
the court.

"Yes; he came home that night--and your
husband went down to let him in?"

"Well! I believe he did. There was a great
noise of folk down stair."

"And you heard your son Benjamin's voice
among the others?"

"Is it to do him harm, sir?" asked she, her
face growing more intelligent and intent on the
business in hand.

"That is not my object in questioning you.
I believe he has left England, so nothing you
can say will do him any harm. You heard your
son's voice, I say?"

"Yes, sir. For sure, I did."

"And some men came up-stairs into your
room? What did they say?"

"They axed where Nathan kept his stocking."

'"And you--did you tell them?"

"No, sir, for I knew Nathan would not like
me to."

"What did you do then?"

A shade of reluctance came over her face,
as if she began to perceive causes and
consequences.

"I just screamed on Bessy--that's my niece,
sir."

"And you heard some one shout out from the
bottom of the stairs?"

She looked piteously at him, but did not
answer.

"Gentlemen of the jury, I wish to call your
particular attention to this fact: she acknowledges
she heard some one shout--some third
person, you observe--shout out to the two
above. What did he say? That is the last
question I shall trouble you with. What did
the third person, left behind down stairs, say?"

Her face worked--her mouth opened two or
three times as if to speak--she stretched out
her arms imploringly; but no word came, and she
fell back into the arms of those nearest to her.
Nathan forced himself forward into the witness-box:

"My Lord Judge, a woman bore ye, as I
reckon; it's a cruel shame to serve a mother so.
It wur my son, my only child, as called out for
us t' open door, and who shouted out for to
hold th' oud woman's throat if she did na stop
her noise, when hoo'd fain ha' cried for her niece
to help. And now yo've truth, and a' th'
truth, and I'll leave yo' to th' Judgment o' God
for th' way yo've getten at it."

Before night the mother was stricken with
paralysis, and lay on her death-bed. But the
broken-hearted go Home, to be comforted of
God.



THE GHOST IN THE CORNER ROOM.

I HAD observed Mr. Governor growing fidgety as his
turn--his "spell," he called it--approached, and
he now surprised us all, by rising with a serious
countenance, and requesting permission to "come
aft" and have speech with me, before he spun his
yarn. His great popularity led to a gracious
concession of this indulgence, and we went out
together into the hall.

"Old shipmate," said Mr. Governor to me; "ever
since I have been aboard of this old hulk, I have
been haunted, day and night."

"By what, Jack?"

Mr. Governor, clapping his hand on my shoulder and
keeping it there, said:

"By something in the likeness of a Woman."

"Ah! Your old affliction. You'll never get over
that, Jack, if you live to be a hundred."

"No, don't talk so, because I am very serious. All
night long, I have been haunted by one figure. All
day, the same figure has so bewildered me in the
kitchen, that I wonder I haven't poisoned the
whole ship's company. Now, there's no fancy here.
Would you like to see the figure?"

"I should like to see it very much."

"Then here it is!" said Jack. Thereupon, he
presented my sister, who had stolen out quietly,
after us.

"Oh, indeed?" said I. "Then, I suppose, Patty, my
dear, I have no occasion to ask whether you have
been haunted?"

"Constantly, Joe," she replied.

The effect of our going back again, all three
together, and of my presenting my sister as the
Ghost from the Corner Room, and Jack as the Ghost
from my Sister's Room, was triumphant--the
crowning hit of the night. Mr. Beaver was so
particularly delighted, that he by-and-by declared
"a very little would make him dance a hornpipe."
Mr. Governor immediately supplied the very little,
by offering to make it a double hornpipe; and
there ensued such toe-and-heeling, and
buckle-covering, and double-shuffling, and
heel-sliding, and execution of all sorts of
slippery manoeuvres with vibratory legs, as none
of us ever saw before, or will ever see again.
When we had all laughed and applauded till we were
faint, Starling, not to be outdone, favoured us
with a more modern saltatory entertainment in the
Lancashire clog manner--to the best of my belief,
the longest dance ever performed: in which the
sound of his feet became a Locomotive going
through cuttings, tunnels, and open country, and
became a vast number of other things we should
never have suspected, unless he had kindly told us
what they were.

It was resolved before we separated that night,
that our three months' period in the Haunted House
should be wound up with the marriage of my sister
and Mr. Governor. Belinda was nominated
bridesmaid, and Starling was engaged for
bridegroom's man.

In a word, we lived our term out, most happily,
and were never for a moment haunted by anything
more disagreeable than our own imaginations and
remembrances. My cousin's wife, in her great love
for her husband and in her gratitude to him for
the change her love had wrought in her, had told
us, through his lips, her own story; and I am sure
there was not one of us who did not like her the
better for it, and respect her the more.

So, at last, before the shortest month in the year
was quite out, we all walked forth one morning to
the church with the spire, as if nothing uncommon
were going to happen; and there Jack and my sister
were married, as sensibly as could be. It occurs
to me to mention that I observed Belinda and
Alfred Starling to be rather sentimental and low,
on the occasion, and that they are since engaged
to be married in the same church. I regard it as
an excellent thing for both, and a kind of union
very wholesome for the times in which we live. He
wants a little poetry, and she wants a little
prose, and the marriage of the two things is the
happiest marriage I know for all mankind.

Finally, I derived this Christmas Greeting from
the Haunted House, which I affectionately address
with all my heart to all my readers:--Let us use
the great virtue, Faith, but not abuse it; and let
us put it to its best use, by having faith in the
great Christmas book of the New Testament, and in
one another.

THE END.
